recent investigations go to show that Kurenberg was indebted to
the "Nibelungen" strophe for the form of his lyric, and not the
Just when the legend emigrated to Skandinavia we do not know, but
The second source of the Siegfried story is the so-called
therefore of minor importance as a source.
"Nibelungenlied" stops with the death of the Nibelungs.
however, but for another. The exchange of forms on the part of
As to the fight with the dragon, Boer believes that it did not
unnatural in the extreme, for she had reigned there ten years or
The second half of the tale, the destruction of the Nibelungs,
is treated of very briefly in the early Norse versions, but the
"Nibelungenlied", which knows so little of Siegfried's youth, has
Let us pass now to the consideration of the strophic form of the
"Nibelungenlied". The two Danish ballads of "Grimhild's Revenge"
Uns ist in alten maeren   wunders vil geseit
von heleden lobebaeron,   von grozer arebeit,
von froude und hochgeziten,   von weinen und von klagen,
von kuener recken striten   muget ir nu wunder hoeren sagen.
Ez wuochs in Burgonden   ein edel magedin,
daz in allen landen   niht schoeners mohte sin,
Kriemhild geheizen;   si wart ein scoene wip,
darambe muosen degene   vil verliesen den lip.
Der minneclichen meide   triuten wol gezam,
ir muotten kuene recken,   niemen was ir gram,
ane ma zen schoene   so was ir edel lip;
der iunevrouwen tugende   zierten anderiu wip.
Ir pilagen drie kilnege   edel unde rich,
Ganther ande Geruot,   die recken lobelieh,
und Giselher der iunge,   ein uz erwelter degen,
diu frouwe was ir swester,   die fu'rsten hetens in ir
pflegen.
Die herren waren milte,   von arde hohe erborn,
mit kraft unmazen kuene,   die recken uz erkorn,
dazen Burgonden   so was ir lant genant,
si framden starkiu wunder   sit in Etzelen lant.
Ze Wormze bidem Rine   si wenden mit ir kraft,
in diende von ir landen   stolziu ritterscaft
mit lobelichen eren   unz an ir endes zit,
sit sturben si inemerliche   von zweier edelen frouwen nit.
The language of the "Nibelungenlied" is the so-called Middle High
(1)  A is a parchment MS. of the second half of the thirteenth
century, now found in Munich.  It forms the basis of
Lachmann's edition.  It is a parchment MS. of the middle of
the thirteenth century, belonging to the monastery of St.
Gall.  It has been edited by Bartsch, "Deutsche Klassiker
des Mittelalters", vol. 3, and by Piper, "Deutsche National-
Literatur", vol. 6.  C is a parchment MS., of the thirteenth
century, now in the ducal library of Donauesehingen.  It is
the best written of all the MSS., and has been edited by
(2)  The "Thidreksaga" differs from the other Norse versions in
having "Sigfrod", as he is called here, brought up in
ignorance of his parents, a trait which was probably
borrowed from the widespread "Genoveva" story, although
thought by some to have been an original feature of our
legend.
(3)  The "Thidreksaga", which has forgotten the enmity of the
brothers, and calls Sigurd's tutor "Mimr", tells the episode
in somewhat different fashion.  The brothers plan to kill
Sigurd, and the latter is attacked by the dragon, while
burning charcoal in the forest.  After killing the monster
with a firebrand, Sigurd bathes himself in the blood and
thus become covered with a horny skin, which renders him
invulnerable, save in one place between the shoulder blades,
which he could not reach.  This bathing in the blood is also
related in the Seyfrid ballad and in the "Nibelungenlied",
with the difference, that the vulnerable spot is caused by a
linden leaf falling upon him.
(4)  The fact that all but one of these names alliterate, shows
that the Norse version is here more original.  Gunnar is the
same as Gunther (Gundaharius), Hogni as Hagen; Gutthorm
(Godomar) appears in the German version as Gernot.  In this
latter the father is called Danerat, the mother Uote, and
the name Grimhild is transferred from the mother to the
daughter.
(5)  In the prose "Edda", in the water which drips from Gudrun's
hair.
Full many a wonder is told us in stories old, of heroes worthy of
Three kings, noble and puissant, did nurture her, Gunther (4) and
Thus in her heart Kriemhild forsware all love. Many a happy day
(1)  "Nibelungenlied", the lay of the Nibelungs.  The ordinary
etymology of this name is 'children of the mist'
("Nebelkinder", O.N. "Niflungar"), and it is thought to have
belonged originally to the dwarfs.  Piper, I, 50, interprets
it as 'the sons of Nibul'; Boer, II, 198, considers
"Hniflungar" to be the correct Norse form and interprets it
as 'the descendants of Hnaef' (O.E. "Hnaef", O.H.G.
"Hnabi"), whose death is related in the "Finnsaga".
"adventura").  The word meant originally a happening,
especially some great event, then the report of such an
event.  Here it is used in the sense of the different cantos
or "fitts" of the poem, as in the "Gudrun" and other M.H.G.
epics.  Among the courtly poets it also frequently denotes
the source, or is the personification of the muse of poetry.
(3)  "Kriemhild" is the Upper German form of the Frankish
"Grimhild".  In the MSS., the name generally appears with a
further shifting as "Chriemhilt", as if the initial
consonant were Germanic "k".  On the various forms of the
name, which have never yet been satisfactorily explained,
(4)  "Gunther" is the historical "Gundahari", king of the
Burgundians in the fifth century.
(5)  "Gernot" was probably introduced by some minstrel in place
of the historical "Godomar", who appears in the Norse
version as "Gutthormr", though the names are not
etymologically the same, as "Godomar" would be "Guthmarr" in
(6)  "Giselher" is the historical "Gislaharius".  Although
mentioned by the "Lex Burgundionum" as one of the Burgundian
kings, he does not appear in the early Norse version, or in
other poems dealing with these persons, such as the
"Waltharius", the "Rabenschlacht", the "Rosengarten", etc.,
and was probably introduced at a late date into the saga.
Originally no role was ascribed to him, and not even his
death is told.  He probably came from some independent
source.
(7)  "Etzel" is the German form for the historical "Attila"
(Norse "Atli").  A discussion of his connection with the
saga will be found in the introduction.
(8)  "Worms" is the ancient "Borbetomagus", which in the first
century B.C. was the chief city of the German tribe of the
"Vangioni".  In the fifth century it was the capital of the
Burgundian kingdom, but was destroyed by the Huns.  The
Merovingians rebuilt it, and in the seventh century it
became a bishopric where Charlemagne at times held his
court.  It was later noted as the meeting-place of many
imperial diets.  It remained a free city till 1801.  In the
"Thidreksaga" the name is corrupted into "Wernize".
(9)  "Uta" (M.H.G. "Uote").  The name means ancestress, and is
frequently used for the mother of heroes.  The modern German
form is "Ute", but in order to insure its being pronounced
with two syllables, the form "Uta" was chosen.
(10) "Dankrat" (M.H.G. "Dancrat") appears as the father only in
the "Nibelungenlied" and poems dependent on it, e.g., the
"Klage" and "Biterolf", elsewhere as "Gibiche" (Norse
(11) "Hagen of Troneg".  Troneg is probably a corruption of the
name of the Latin colony, "colonia Trajana", on the Lower
Rhine, which as early as the fifth century was written as
"Troja", giving rise to the legend that the Franks were
descended from the ancient Trojans.  "Troja" was then
further corrupted to "Tronje" and "Tronege".  Hagen was
therefore originally a Frank and had no connection with the
Burgundian kings, as the lack of alliteration also goes to
show.  Boer thinks that not Siegfried but Hagen originally
lived at Xanten (see note 3 to Adventure II), as this was
often called Troja Francorum. When the Hagen story was
connected with the Burgundians and Hagen became either their
brother or their vassal, his home was transferred to Worms
and Siegfried was located at Xanten, as he had no especial
localization.  Thus Siegfried is never called Siegfried of
Troneg, as is Hagen.  Other attempts to explain Troneg will
be found in Piper, I, 48.
(12) "Dankwart" is not an historical character nor one that
belonged to the early form of the legend.  He may have come
from another saga, where he played the principal role as
Droege (ZsfdA. 48, 499) thinks.  Boer considers him to be
Hagen's double, invented to play a part that would naturally
fall to Hagen's share, were he not otherwise engaged at the
moment.  In our poem he is called "Dancwart der snelle", a
word that has proved a stumbling-block to translators,
because in modern German it means 'speedy', 'swift'.  Its
original meaning was, however, 'brave', 'warlike', although
the later meaning is already found in M.H.G.  In all such
doubtful cases the older meaning has been preferred, unless
the context forbids, and the word 'doughty' has been chosen
to translate it.
(13) "Ortwin of Metz" appears also in the "Eckenlied",
"Waltharius", and in "Biterolf".  He is most likely a late
introduction (but see Piper, I, 44).  Rieger thinks that he
belonged to a wealthy family "De Metis".  Though the "i" is
long in the original, and Simrock uses the form "Ortewein"
in his translation, the spelling with short "i" has been
chosen, as the lack of accent tends to shorten the vowel in
such names.
(14) "Gere" is likewise a late introduction.  He is perhaps the
historical Margrave Gere (965) of East Saxony, whom Otto the
Great appointed as a leader against the Slavs.  See O. von
(15) "Eckewart" is also a late accession.  He is perhaps the
historical margrave of Meissen (1002), the first of the
name.  He, too, won fame in battle against the Slavs.
knightly minstrel, is hardly an historical personage, in
spite of the fact that Alzey is a well-known town in Rhine
Hesse on the Selz, eighteen miles southwest of Mainz.  The
town has, to be sure, a violin in its coat of arms, as also
the noble family of the same name.  It is most likely,
however, that this fact caused Folker to be connected with
Alzei.  In the "Thidreksaga" Folker did not play the role of
minstrel, and it is probable that some minstrel reviser of
our poem developed the character and made it the
personification of himself.
(17) "Rumolt", "Bindolt", and "Hunolt" have no historical basis
and merely help to swell the retinue of the Burgundians.
(18) "Worship".  This word has been frequently used here in its
older meaning of 'worth', 'reverence', 'respect', to
translate the M.H.G. "eren", 'honors'.
ADVENTURE II. Of Siegfried.
the noble queen, for the love of her son, dealt out ruddy gold in
(1)  "Siegmund" (M.H.G. "Sigemunt") was originally the hero of an
(2)  "Siegelind" (M.H.G. "Sigelint") is the correct name of
Siegfried's mother, as the alliteration shows.  The Early
Norse version has "Hjordis", which has come from the "Helgi
(3)  "Xanten" (M.H.G. "Santen" from the Latin "ad sanctos") is at
Dusseldorf.  It does not now lie on the Rhine, but did in
(4)  "Sword-thanes" (M.H.G. "swertdegene") were the young squires
youthful prince to receive the accolade with a number of
others.
(5)  "Midsummer festival".  The M.H.G. "sunewende" means
literally the 'sun's turning', i.e., the summer solstice.
This was one of the great Germanic festivals, which the
church later turned into St. John's Eve.  The bonfires still
burnt in Germany on this day are survivals of the old
heathen custom.
(6)  "Hurtling" translates here M.H.G. "buhurt", a word borrowed
from the French to denote a knightly sport in which many
knights clashed together.  Hurtling was used in older
English in the same significance.
building standing alone and largely used as a reception
hall.
splinters', 'fragments of spears'.
(9)  "To-shivered", 'broken to pieces', in imitation of the older
(10) "Spangles" (M.H.G. "spangen"), strips of metal radiating
from the raised centre of the shield and often set, as here,
with precious stones.
ADVENTURE III. How Siegfried Came to Worms.
Tidings of this reached Siegmund's ear; through the talk of the
"What would the king of me?" asked Hagen.
(1)  "Guest" translates here the M.H.G. "gest", a word which may
mean either 'guest' or 'stranger,' and it is often
difficult, as here, to tell to which meaning the preference
should be given.
(2)  "Eleven" translates the M.H.G. "selbe zwelfte", which means
one of twelve.  The accounts are, however, contradictory, as
a few lines below mention is made of twelve companions of
fur of the squirrel.
(4)  "Known".  It was a mark of the experienced warrior, that he
was acquainted with the customs and dress of various
countries and with the names and lineage of all important
personages.  Thus in the "Hildebrandslied" Hildebrand asks
Hadubrand to tell him his father's name, and adds: "If thou
tellest me the one, I shall know the other."
(5)  "Schilbung" and "Nibelung", here spoken of as the sons of a
mighty king, were originally dwarfs, and, according to some
authorities, the original owners of the treasure.  Boer, ix,
transferred from Hagen to these dwarfs at a late stage in
the formation of the saga.
(6)  "Angry of mood".  The reason of this anger is apparent from
the more detailed account in "Biterolf", 7801.  The quarrel
arose from the fact that, according to ancient law,
Siegfried acquired with the sword the rights of the first
born, which the brothers, however, refused to accord to him.
(7)  "Balmung".  In the older Norse version and in the
"Thidreksaga" Siegfried's sword bore the name of Gram.
(8)  "Alberich" is a dwarf king who appears in a number of
legends, e.g., in the "Ortnit saga" and in "Biterolf".
Under the Romance form of his name, "Oberon", he plays an
important role in modern literature.
(9)  "Cloak of Darkness".  This translates the M.H.G.
"tarnkappe", a word often retained by translators.  It is
formed from O.H.G. tarni, 'secret' (cf. O.E. "dyrne"), and
"kappe" from late Latin "cappa", 'cloak'.  It rendered the
wearer invisible and gave him the strength of twelve men.
ADVENTURE IV. How He Fought with the Saxons. (1)
Then spake King Gunther: "For this I'll serve you ever."
"So bid me call a thousand of your men, since of mine own I have
Liudegast, the warrior, then was led away by Siegfried's might to
(1)  "Saxons".  This war with the Saxons does not appear in the
poetic "Edda", but was probably introduced into the story
later to provide the heroes with a suitable activity in the
period elapsing between Siegfried's marriage and the journey
to Brunhild's land.  (In our poem it is placed before the
marriage.)  It reflects the ancient feuds between the Franks
on the one hand and the Saxons and Danes on the other.
Originally Siegfried probably did not take part in it, but
was later introduced and made the leader of the expedition
in place of the king, in accordance with the tendency to
idealize him and to give him everywhere the most important
role.  The two opposing leaders are "Liudeger", lord of the
Saxons, and "Liudegast", king of Denmark.  In "Biterolf"
Liudeger rules over both Saxons and Danes, and Liudegast is
his brother.
(2)  "Fey".  This Scotch and older English word has been chosen
to translate the M.H.G. "veige", 'fated', 'doomed', as it is
etymologically the same word.  The ancient Germans were
fatalists and believed only those would die in battle whom
fate had so predestined.
(3)  "Thirty thousand".  The M.H.G. epics are fond of round
numbers and especially of thirty and its multiples.  They
will be found to occur very frequently in our poem.  See
(4)  "Their".  The original is obscure here; the meaning is,
'when he heard with what message they were come, he rued the
haughtiness of the Burgundians'.
(5)  "Marks of gold".  A mark (Lat. "mares") was half a pound of
gold or silver.
ADVENTURE V. How Siegfried First Saw Kriemhild.
One saw daily riding to the Rhine those who would fain be at the
Liudegast, the Saxon chief, was now cured of his wounds and had
"Whither would ye ride now, noble Siegfried? Pray tarry with the
ADVENTURE VI. How Gunther Fared To Isenland (1) for Brunhild.
"Be still," spake Siegfried, "ye little know her strength."
"Weeds of the very best which can be found are worn all times in
Then spake King Gunther: "Who shall be the captain of the ship?"
(1)  "Isenland" translates here M.H.G. "Islant", which has,
however, no connection with Iceland in spite of the
agreement of the names in German.  "Isen lant", the reading
of the MSS. BJh, has been chosen, partly to avoid confusion,
and partly to indicate its probable derivation from
"Isenstein", the name of Brunhild's castle.  Boer's
interpretation of "Isen" as 'ice' finds corroboration in
Otfrid's form "isine steina" ('ice stones', i.e. crystals)
I, 1. 70.  Isenstein would then mean Ice Castle.  In the
"Thidreksaga" Brunhild's castle is called "Saegarthr" ('Sea
Garden'), and in a fairy tale (No. 93 of Grimm) "Stromberg",
referring to the fact that it was surrounded by the sea.
Here, too, in our poem it stands directly on the shore.
(2)  "Zazamanc", a fictitious kingdom mentioned only here and a
few times in Parzival, Wolfram probably having obtained the
name from this passage.  (See Bartsch, "Germanistische
(3)  "Wont to wear".  In the Middle Ages costly furs and
fish-skins were used as linings and covered, as here
described, with silk or cloth.  By fish such amphibious
animals as otter and beaver were often meant.
(4)  "Well fit".  In this passage "wert", the reading of A and D,
more appropriate to the sense.
(6)  "Brunhild".  The following words are evidently a late
interpolation, and weaken the ending, but have been
translated for the sake of completeness.  They are spoken by
ADVENTURE VII. How Gunther Won Brunhild.
At this Sir Siegfried spake: "I pray you, spy secretly among the
Brunhild, the high-born maid, espied.
Siegfried, the bold, went to the king and bade him tell the queen
When Gunther knew that it was Siegfried, he was overjoyed.
(1)  "Palaces".  See Adventure III, note 7.
(2)  "Surcoat", which here translates the M.H.G. "wafenhemde", is
(3)  "Azagouc".  See Zazamanc, Adventure VI, note 2.  This
strophe is evidently a late interpolation, as it contradicts
the description given above.
(4)  Weights.  The M.H.G. "messe" (Lat. "masse") is just as
indefinite as the English expression.  It was a mass or lump
of any metal, probably determined by the size of the
melting-pot.
"My name is Siegfried," he replied; "I deemed ye knew me well."
From their beds they sprang and were ready in a trice. A thousand
Early on a morn they started on their way. What a speedy journey
To this Dankwart, King Giselher's liegeman, answered: "Most noble
(1)  Adventure VIII.  This whole episode, in which Siegfried
fetches men to aid Gunther in case of attempted treachery on
Brunhild's part, is of late origin and has no counterpart in
the older versions.  It is a further development of
Siegfried's fight in which he slew Schilbung and Nibelung
and became the ruler of the Nibelung land.  The fight with
Alberich is simply a repetition of the one in the former
episode.
measure of distance, as here.
(3)  "Knobs", round pieces of metal fastened to the scourge.
(4)  "Cunning" is to be taken here in the Biblical sense of
'knowing'.  The M.H.G. "listig" which it here translates,
denotes 'skilled' or 'learned' in various arts and is a
standing epithet of dwarfs.
(5)  "Mulled wine" translates M.H.G. "lutertranc", a claret
mulled with herbs and spice and left to stand until clear.
(6)  "Mark".  See Adventure V, note 5.
ADVENTURE IX. How Siegfried Was Sent To Worms.
Then spake the daring knight: "Now give me an envoy's guerdon, ye
Then spake the courtly maid: "It shall be done." She bade her
(1)  "Fillets" were worn only by married women.
(2)  "Ferran", a gray colored cloth of silk and wool; from O.F.
"ferrandine".
(3)  "Clasps" or "brooches" were used to fasten the dresses in
front.
ADVENTURE X. How Brunhild Was Received At Worms.
Siegfried's side.
The king had seated him with Brunhild, the maid, when she espied
But whatsoever the king might say, she remained full sad of mood.
Gunther believed full well what Siegfried spake.
The Lord Siegfried sate in loving wise by his fair wife, in bliss
"schapel" or "schapelin") or wreath was the headdress
especially of unmarried girls, the hair being worn flowing.
It was often of flowers or leaves, but not infrequently of
gold and silver.  (See Weinhold, "Deutsche Frauen im
ADVENTURE XI. How Siegfried Journeyed Homeward With His Wife.
It was loth to Siegfried, when he heard this from Kriemhild. The
The son of Siegmund spake to the princes, as he heard and saw the
(1)  "Eckewart", see Adventure I, note 15.
(2)  "Xanten", see Adventure II, note 3.
(4)  "Dames", i.e., Siegelind and Kriemhild.
ADVENTURE XII. How Gunther Bade Siegfried To The Feasting.
"That will I," said the prince. "I will let thirty of my men ride
Siegfried's land. With the consent of the kinsmen of the king the
Spake Then the valiant Siegfried: "They be welcome to us."
Quoth the stalwart Siegfried: "That might hardly hap."
All who craved it were given steeds and vesture, too.
Then to the margrave spake the noble queen: "Now tell me, cometh
"She cometh to you surely," quoth Gere, the knight.
(1)  "Norway".  The interpolated character of the Adventures XI
to XIII, which are not found in the earlier versions, is
shown by the confusion in the location of Siegfried's court.
The poet has forgotten that Xanten is his capital, and
locates it in Norway.  No mention is made, however, of the
messengers crossing the sea; on the contrary, Kriemhild
speaks of their being sent down the Rhine.
ADVENTURE XIII. How They Journeyed To The Feasting.
"That will I gladly," quoth she, "for I have good cause to be her
When that the ruler of the land spied Siegfried and Siegmund, how
At this spake Gunther: "Now hath joy happed to me thereby."
ADVENTURE XIV. How The Queens Reviled Each Other.
On a day before the vesper tide a great turmoil arose, which many
Kriemhild replied: "Now dost thou see, how he standeth, how right
The ladies both grew wonderly wroth of mood. Then spake the Lady
To this Kriemhild replied: "In faith that shall be done."
"Whom callest thou here leman?" spake the queen.
"I' faith," spake then Brunhild, "Gunther shall hear of this."
Both ladies now had fallen into grievous wrath.
Quoth King Gunther: "Then hath she done ill."
King Gunther spake: "Have him come hither. He must let us hear if
Netherland." One bade fetch at once Kriemhild's love.
When Siegfried saw the angry dames (he wist not of the tale), how
Then King Gunther spake: "It doth rue me sore, forsooth. My Lady
They bade the proud Burgundians form a ring. Siegfried, the bold,
Then spake King Gunther: "How might that chance?"
'dear one'), 'mistress' in a bad sense.
ADVENTURE XV. How Siegfried Was Betrayed.
Quoth Lord Siegfried: "Ye shall have small care."
"That will I well, dear my lady," Hagen then replied.
(1)  "Brach", 'hunting dog', cognate with M.H.G. "braeke", used
here.
ADVENTURE XVI. How Siegfried Was Slain.
Gunther and Hagen, the passing bold knights, faithlessly let cry
wine. Unless men purvey the hunters better, I'll be no more your
hunting-fellow. I have well deserved that they regard me, too."
"So let us try it then," quoth Hagen, the knight.
(1)  "Lion."  It is hardly necessary to state that lions did not
roam at large in the forests of Germany.  They were,
however, frequently exhibited in the Middle Ages, and the
poet introduced one here to enhance Siegfried's fame as a
hunter.
(2)  "Ure-oxen", the auerochs, or European bison, now practically
(3)  "Shelk" (M.H.G. "schelch"), probably a species of giant
deer.
(4)  "Fragrance".  It was believed that the odor of the panther
attracted the game.  Compare the description of the panther
in the older "Physiologus", where the odor is said to
surpass that of all ointments.
(5)  "Otter" translates here M.H.G. "ludem", whose exact
connotation is not known.  Some interpret it to meau the
fish otter, others the "Waldschrat", a kind of faun.
(6)  "Balmung", see Adventure III, note 7.
(7)  "Spessart wood" lies forty to fifty miles east of Worms and
is therefore too distant for a day's hunt, but such trifles
did not disturb the poet.
(8)  "Mulled wine", see Adventure VIII, note 5.
(9)  "Feet".  This was probably done as a handicap.  The time
consumed in rising to his feet would give his opponent quite
a start.
heaviness was buried in their hearts.
Quoth the knights: "That shall be done."
(1)  "Bleed".  This was not only a popular superstition, but also
not been discovered, or if any one was suspected.  The
suspected person was requested to approach the bier and
touch the body, in the belief that the blood would flow
afresh if the one touching the body were guilty.  Our
passage is the first instance of its mention in German
The usage was also known in France and England.  See the
instances quoted by Jacob Grimm in his "Rechtsaltertumer",
ADVENTURE XVIII. How Siegmund Journeyed Home Again.
Then answered the hapless wife: "Of that hath Kriemhild need."
orphaned. When your son groweth up, he will comfort your heart.
Meanwhile many bold heroes and good shall serve you."
When they marked that she would not go hence, then wept all of
ADVENTURE XIX. How The Nibelung Hoard Was Brought to Worms.
"I trow not," spake Hagen, "that it will ever hap."
Many of Alberich's kinsmen journeyed with Gernot hence. When they
Spake then Hagen: "Let me be the guilty one."
Few of their oaths were kept. From the widow they took the mighty
(1)  "Marriage morning gift" was the gift which it was customary
for the bridegroom to give the bride on the morning after
the bridal night.  On this custom see Weinhold, "Deutsche
(2)  "A1berich", see Adventure III, note 8.  It is characteristic
(3)  "Wishing-rod", a magic device for discovering buried
treasure.  Cf. Grimm, "Deutsche Mythologie," ii, 813.
(4)  "Loche", according to Piper, is the modern "Locheim" in the
Rhine province.
ADVENTURE XX. How King Etzel (1) Sent To Burgundy For Kriemhild.
Quoth the margrave: "That doth like me well."
On the seventh morning the host and his warriors rode forth from
"How can I believe," spake at once the king, "that the lord of
Bechelaren be come to this land?"
With this speech Hagen, the passing stately knight, agreed.
Said Hagen: "Never will I give you this advice."
Gloomy of mood grew Hagen when he heard these words. Gernot and
The others noted well her unwilling mood.
The bold knights and good must needs obey.
Quoth the margrave: "For this, my lady, I am ready."
Rudeger with all his vassals swore that he would ever serve her
Of this fair Kriemhild pledged her hand before the knights.
(1)  "Etzel", see Adventure I, note 7.
daughter of king "Oserich" or "Osantrix", as the
"Thidreksaga" calls him.  In the latter work (chap. 73-80)
we read how Rudeger (Rodingeir) took her by force from her
father and brought her to Etzel to be the latter's bride.
On her identity with the historical "Kerka" of Priscus, see
(3)  "Rudeger of Bechelaren", or, as the name reads in the
"Thidreksaga", "Rodingeir of Bakalar", is probably not an
historical personage, but the hero of a separate legend.
Evidence of this is seen in the fact that he calls himself
an exile, though he is Etzel's mightiest vassal, with
castles and lands in fief.  He may have been introduced, as
Wilmanns ("Anz." xviii 101) thinks, to play a role
originally assigned to Dietrich, who is also an exile.
Mullenhoff considered him to have been a mythical person.
Bechelaren, or Pechlarn, lies at the junction of the Erlach
with the Danube.
(4)  "hast seen here".  "Biterolf", 9471, relates that Dietrich
had carried Siegfried, when young, by force to Etzel's
court.
(5)  "full soon".  See Adventure III, note 4.
(6)  "Paynim" (O F. "paienime", late Latin "paganismus"),
(7)  "gold for offerings".  This was the gold to be used as
offering when masses were sung for Siegfried's soul.
ADVENTURE XXI. How Kriemhild Journeyed To The Huns.
Let now the messengers ride. We will do you to wit, how the queen
The steeds were harnessed and led before the castle of Bechelaren
To the Traisem (11) they escorted hence the guests. Rudeger's men
(1)  "Vergen" is the modern Pforing, below Ingolstadt.  A ferry
across the river existed here from ancient times.
(2)  "Pilgrim", or "Pilgerin", as he is variously called, is an
historical personage.  He was bishop of Passau from 971 to
(3)  "Enns" (M.H.G. "Ens") is one of the tributaries of the
Danube, flowing into it about eleven miles southeast of
(4)  "Efferding" (M.H.G. "Everdingen") is a town on the Danube,
about thirteen miles west of Linz.
(5)  "Traun" (M.H.G. "Trune") is a river of Upper Austria,
forty-four miles southeast of Linz.
(6)  "Truncheons", see Adventure II, note 8.
(7)  "Botelung's son" is Attila, who is so called in our poem, in
version "Atli" is the son of "Budli".  (On this point see
names are shown to be identical.
(8)  "Medelick" is the modern Molk, or Melk, a town on the Danube
granite cliff on which stands a famous Benedictine abbey.
(9)  "Astolt" appears only in this passage; nothing else is known
(10) "Mantern" is situated at the influx of the Flanitz, opposite
(11) "Traisem", Traisen, is a tributary of the Danube in Lower
Austria, emptying near Traismauer.
(12) "Zeisenmauer" (M.H.G. "Zeizenmure").  All the MSS. but C and
"treisem moure", which corresponds better to the modern
name, as Zeiselmauer lies between Tulln and Vienna.  It is
possible, however, that the town on the Traisem was
originally called Zeiselmauer, as the road leading from
Traismauer to Tulln still bears the name of Zeiselstrasse.
ADVENTURE XXII. How Etzel Made Kriemhild His Bride.
All the while that Etzel stood at Kriemhild's side, the youthful
From thence tidings came to Etzelburg, (13) at which both men and
When that the king with his wife rode from the shore, the noble
(1)  "Kiev" (M.H.G. "Kiew") is now a government in the
southwestern part of Russia.  Its capital of the same name,
situated on the Dnieper, is the oldest of the better known
cities of Russia, and in the latter Middle Ages was an
important station of the Hanseatic league.
(2)  "Petschenegers", a Turkish tribe originally dwelling to the
north of the Caspian.  By conquest they acquired a kingdom
extending from the Don to Transylvania.  They were feared
for their ferociousness and because they continually invaded
the surrounding countries, especially Kiev.
(3)  "Tulna" (M.H.G. "Tulne") is the modern Tulln, a walled town
of Lower Austria, seventeen milos northwest of Vienna on the
(4)  "Ramung and Gibeck" (M.H.G. "Gibeche") appear only in our
poem, nothing else is known of them.
(5)  "Hornbog" is frequently mentioned in the "Thidreksaga", but
nothing otherwise is known of him.
(6)  "Hawart" is perhaps identical with the Saxon duke Hadugot,
who is reputed to have played an important part in the
conquest of Thuringia.  He evidently comes from the Low
German version.
(7)  "Iring" is considered by Wilmanns to have been originally an
"Iringi".  He occurs in a legend of the fall of the
Thuringian kingdom, where he played such a prominent role
that the Milky Way was named after him.  See W. Grimm,
"Heldensage", p. 394, who thinks, however, that the
connection of Iring with the Milky Way is the result of a
confusion.
(8)  "Irnfried" is considered to be Hermanfrid of Thuringia, who
was overthrown and killed in A.D. 535 by Theuderich with the
aid of the Saxons.  See Felix Dahn, "Urgeschichte", iii,
(9)  "Bloedel" is Bleda, the brother of Attila, with whom he
reigned conjointly from A.D. 433 to 445.  In our poem the
name appears frequently with the diminutive ending, as
(10) "Werbel and Swemmel", who doubtless owe their introduction
to some minstrel, enjoy special favor and are intrusted with
the important mission of inviting the Burgundians to Etzel's
court, an honor that would hardly be accorded to persons of
their rank.  Swemmel appears mostly in the diminutive form
(11) "Heimburg" lies on the Danube near the Hungarian border.
(12) "Misenburg" is the modern Wieselburg on the Danube,
twenty-one miles southeast of Pressburg.
(13) "Etzelburg" was later identified with the old part of
Budapest, called in German "Ofen", through the influence of
Hungarish legends, but, as G. Heinrich has shown, had no
definite localization in the older M.H.G. epics.  See
Bleyer, PB. Belt. xxxi 433 and 506.  The name occurs in
documents as late as the fifteenth century.
(14) "Herrat", the daughter of King "Nentwin" is frequently
mentioned in the "Thidreksaga" as Dietrich's betrothed.  She
is spoken of as the exiled maid.
(15) "Nentwin" is not found in any other saga, and nothing else
is known of him.  See W. Grimm, "Heldensage", 103.
ADVENTURE XXIII. How Kriemhild Thought To Avenge Her Wrongs.
Again the queen spake: "It hath been well told you, that I have
King Etzel answered: "On next midsummer's day."
"We'll do as ye command," spake then Werbel.
The queen bade them be brought secretly unto her bower, where she
(1)  "Ortlieb" is not historical, and in the "Thidreksaga"
Etzel's son is called Aldrian.  Bleyer, "Die germanischen
Elemente der ungarischen, Hunnensage", PB. Beit. xxxi, 570,
attempt to prove the identity of the names by means of a
form "Arda", giving on the one hand Hungarian "Aladar",
"Aldrian", on the other German "Arte", "Orte".
(2)  "Hungary".  According to the account in "Waltharius", Hagen
spent his youth as a hostage at Etzel's court.
ADVENTURE XXIV. How Werbel And Swemmel Brought The Message.
This none wist, till Hagen of Troneg saw them, who then spake to
departed hence."
Then spake Prince Giselher to the knight: "Sith ye know you to be
Then the queen went to where she saw the king. How lovingly Dame
(1)  "Hostage", i.e., he has never betrayed you to your enemies.
(2)  "Gran", royal free city of Hungary, on the right bank of the
northwest of Budapest.
ADVENTURE XXV. How The Lords All Journeyed To The Huns.
preserve their honor there."
The noble Lady Uta then spake to her sons: "Pray tarry here, good
The ferryman replied: "This may not be. My dear lords have foes,
(1)  "a thousand and sixty".  This does not agree with the
account in Adventure XXIV, witere we read of a thousand of
Hagen's men, eighty of Dankwart's, and thirty of Folker's.
The nine thousand foot soldiers mentioned here are a later
interpolation, as the "Thidreksaga" speaks of only a
thousand all told.
(2)  "Eastern Frankland", or East Franconia, is the ancient
province of "Franconia Orientalis", the region to the east
of the Spessart forest, including the towns of Fulda,
Wurzburg and Barnberg.  In "Biterolf" Dietlich journeys
through Eastern Frankland to the Danube.
(3)  "Swanfield" (M.H.G. "Swanevelde") is the ancient province of
(4)  "Gelfrat" is a Bavarian lord and the brother of "Else",
mentioned below.  Their father's name was also Else.
(5)  "Wise women", a generic name for all supernatural women of
German mythology.  While it is not specifically mentioned,
it is probable that the wise women, or mermaids, as they are
also called here, were 'swan maidens', which play an
important role in many legends and are endowed with the gift
of prophecy.  They appear in the form of swans, and the
strange attire of the wise women mentioned here refers to
the so-called swan clothes which they wore and which enabled
Hagen to recognize them as supernatural beings.  On bathing
they lay aside this garment, and he who obtains possession
of it has them in his power.  This explains their eagerness
to give Hagen information, if he will return their garments
to them.  For an account of them see Grimm's "Mythologie",
(6)  "Aldrian" is not an historical personage; the name is merely
'ancestor', just as Uta means 'ancestress'.  In the
"Thidreksaga" Aldrian is the king of the Nibelung land and
the father of Gunther, Giselher, and Gernot, whereas Hagen
is the son of an elf by the same mother.
(7)  Else appears also in "Biterolf"; in the "Thidreksaga" he is
called "Elsung", the younger, as his father bore the same
name.  See Adventure XXV, note 4.
(8)  "Amelrich" is the ferryman's brother.
(9)  "Spear".  It was the custom to offer presents on a spear
point, perhaps to prevent the recipient from treacherously
using his sword.  Compare the similar description in the
"Hildebrandslied", 37, where we are told that gifts should
be received with the spear.
(10) "Goods".  In the "Thidreksaga" the ferryman desires the ring
marriage and the desire for wealth.
ADVENTURE XXVI (1) How Gelfrat Was Slain By Dankwart.
At this hold Dankwart spake: "I'll play the umpire here."
How loth it was to some when they heard this tale! They remained
(1)  "Adventure XXVI".  This adventure is a late interpolation,
as it is not found in the "Thidreksaga".  Originally the
river must be thought of as separating them from Etzel's
kingdom.
(2)  "Moering" (M.H.G. "Moeringen") lies between Pforing and
Ingolstadt.  In the "Thidreksaga" we are told that the
mermaids were bathing in a body of water called "Moere",
whereas in our poem they bathe in a spring.  This may be the
original form of the account and the form here contaminated.
(3)  "Eckewart", see Adventure I, note 15.  It will be remembered
stayed with her at Worms after Siegfried's death, and
finally journeyed with her to Etzel's court.  Originally he
must be thought of as guarding the boundary of Etzel's land.
Without doubt he originally warned the Burgundians, as in
the early Norse versions, where Kriemhild fights on the side
of her brothers, but since this duty was given to Dietrich,
he has nothing to do but to announce their arrival to
Rudeger.  His sleeping here may, however, be thought to
indicate that it was too late to warn Gunther and his men.
ADVENTURE XXVII. How They Came To Bechelaren.
Then spake the margrave: "Sith I have naught of castles, I will
When the margravine heard Hagen's speech, it minded her of her
(3)  "Nudung" was slain, according to the "Thidreksaga", chap.
Wielant, the smith, in the battle of Gronsport.  There,
chap. 369, he is Gotelind's brother, but in "Biterolf" and
the "Rosengarten" he is her son.
(4)  "Marks", see Adventure V, note 5.
ADVENTURE XXVIII. How The Burgundians Came To Etzel's Castle.
Sore abashed was King Etzel's wife, for bitterly she feared Sir
Quoth Hagen: "There will be help for that."
Thus the two brave men talked together. King Etzel saw this, and
(1)  "Hildebrand" is the teacher and armor bearer of Dietrich.
He is the hero of the famous "Hildebrandslied".
(2)  "Wolfhart" is Hildebrand's nephew.  In the "Thidreksaga" he
falls in the battle of Gronsport.
(3)  "Amelung land" is the name under which Dietrich's land
appears.  Theodorich, the king of the East Goths, belonged
to the race of the Amali.
(4)  "Feast".  That Kriemhild kissed only Giselher, who was
innocent of Siegfried's death, aroused Hagen's suspicions.
(5)  "Vassal".  No other account speaks of Aldrian as being at
Etzel's court.  He is probably confused here with his son,
for Hagen's stay with Etzel in various legends, as also in
our poem a few lines further down.
(6)  "Walther of Spain" is Walther of Aquitania, a legendary
personage of whom the O.E. fragment "Waldere", the Latin
epic "Waltharius", a M.H.G. epic, and the "Thidreksaga"
tell.  He flees with Hildegund, the daughter of the
Burgundian King Herrich, from Etzel's court, as related
here, but has to fight for his life against overpowering
numbers, in the "Thidreksaga" against the pursuing Huns, in
the other sources against the Burgundians.  In both cases
Hagen is among his foes, but takes no part in the fight at
first, out of friendship for Walther.
ADVENTURE XXIX. How Hagen Would Not Rise For Kriemhild.
Then the two worshipful warriors parted, Hagen of Troneg and
Sir Dietrich. Over his shoulder Gunther's liegeman gazed for a
Quoth Hagen: "Now will I follow you."
When the lord of the Rhine had entered the hall, the mighty Etzel
(1)  "Scathful scathe" here imitates the M.H.G. "scaden
scedelich".
(2)  "Balmung", see Adventure III, note 7.
(3)  "friend... friendly".  This repetition occurs in the
original.
(4)  "Irnfried", see Adventure XXII, note 8.
(5)  "Hawart" and "Iring", Adventure XXII, notes 6 and 7.
(6)  "Morat" (M.H.G. "moraz") from late Latin "moratum", mulberry
mulberry-juice.
ADVENTURE XXX. How They Kept The Watch.
Etzel parted then full merrily from his guests. Men pressed the
Then the queen was told that her messengers had compassed naught.
(1)  "Arras", the capital of Artois in the French Netherlands.
In older English "arras" is used also for tapestry.
ADVENTURE XXXI. (1) How They Went To Church.
When they had worshiped God and would hence again, many a Hunnish
King Etzel was still sitting by the queen.
"That the fiddler did, Folker, the valiant minstrel."
This speech was also heard by Kriemhild, King Etzel's wife.
(1)  "Adventure XXXI".  This adventure is of late origin, being
found only in our poem.  See the introduction.
(2)  "Truncheons", see Adventure II, note 8.
(3)  "Schrutan".  This name does not occur elsewhere.  Piper
suggests, that perhaps a Scotchman is meant, as "Skorottan"
appears in the "Thidreksaga", chap. 28, as an ancient name
(4)  "Gibecke", "Ramung" and "Hornbog", see Adventure XXII, notes
(5)  "Nudung", see Adventure XXVII, note 3.
(6)  "Ortlieb".  In the "Thidreksaga" Etzel's son is called
Aldrian.  There, however, he is killed because he strikes
Hagen in the face, here in revenge for the killing of the
Burgundian footmen.
ADVENTURE XXXII (1) How Bloedel Was Slain.
Then men saw the warrior walk forth in full lordly wise. As the
(1)  Adventure XXXII.  The details of the following scenes differ
them will be found in the works of Wilmanns and Boer.
(2)  "Marriage morning gift" (M.H.G. "morgengabe") was given by
the bridegroom to the bride on the morning after the
wedding.  See Adventure XIX, note 1.
sedere"), older English for an upper servant who brought on
and removed the dishes from the table.
ADVENTURE XXXIII. How The Burgundians Fought The Huns.
He called in answer: "Who hath done this deed?"
"Much it wondereth me," spake Hagen, "what the Hunnish knights be
When Gunther thus begged and bade in the stress of the fray, they
Of all the kinsmen of the Huns within the hall, not one of these
(1)  "Friendship" translates the M.H.G. "minne trinken" 'to drink
the idea of pouring out a libation to the gods.  Later it
assumed the form of drinking to the honor of God, of a
saint, or of an absent friend.  See Grimm, "Mythologie", p.
(2)  "Amelungs", see Adventure XXVIII, note 3.
(3)  "Wolfhart", see Adventure XXVIII, note 2.
ADVENTURE XXXIV. How They Cast Out The Dead.
ADVENTURE XXXV. How Iring Was Slain.
money'), legal term for compensation paid for a man killed.
(2)  "Waska".  In "Biterolf" it is the name of the sword of
Walther of Wasgenstein and is connected with the old German
name, "Wasgenwald", for the Vosges.
ADVENTURE XXXVI. How The Queen Gave Orders To Burn the Hall.
"Now unbind your helmets," spake the good Knight Hagen. "I and my
To this King Gunther answered: "Dire need constrained us; all my
Soon their shields were seen sticking full of darts that had been
ADVENTURE XXXVII. How Margrave Rudeger Was Slain.
Quoth she: "Bethink thee, Rudeger, of thy great fealty, of thy
constancy, and of thine oaths, that thou wouldst ever avenge mine
Said the margrave: "Seldom have I denied you aught."
Then Kriemhild spake again: "Most noble Rudeger, take pity on our
"That I should do by right," spake the youthful Giselher, "but if
Quoth the margrave: "Inly doth this grieve me."
Rudeger's death.
(1)  "Parlous", older English for 'perilous'.
(2)  "Fey", 'doomed to death', here in the sense of 'already
slain'.  See Adventure V, note 2.
(3)  "Strangers", i.e., those who are sojourning there far from
home.
ADVENTURE XXXVIII. How All Sir Dietrich's Warriors Were Slain.
Then spake the noble champion: "I have good cause for wail. The
Burgundians have slain the good Sir Rudeger."
At this the men of Berne waxed passing wroth of mood. Wolfhart, a
Now of all the knights none was alive save the twain, Gunther and
(1)  "Helfrich" appears also in the "Thidreksaga", chap. 330,
where we are told that he was the bravest and courtliest of
all knights.
(2)  "Master Hildebrand", see Adventure XXVIII, note 1.
(3)  "Siegstab" is Dietrich's nephew.  He also appears in the
"Thidreksaga", but in a different role.
(4)  "Wolfwin" is mentioned in the "Klage", 1541, as Dietrich's
nephew.
(5)  "Wolfbrand" and "Helmnot" appear only here.
(6)  "Ritschart".   With the exception of Helfrich (see Above
note 1), these names do not occur elsewhere, though one of
the sons of Haimon was called Wichart.
ADVENTURE XXXIX. How Gunther And Hagen And Kriemhild Were Slain.
Then Sir Dietrich fetched himself his coat of mail, and Master
Hildebrand sprang in wrath towards Kriemhild. For fear of him she
(1)  "Waskstone", see Adventure XXXV, note 2.
(2)  "Fall".  The word "not", translated here "fall", means
really 'disaster', but as this word is not in keeping with
the style, "fall" has been chosen as preferable to 'need',
used by some translators.  The MS. C has here "liet" instead
of "not" of A and B.
(3)  The "Nibelungenlied" is continued by the so-called "Klage",
a poem written in short rhyming couplets.  As the name
indicates, it describes the lamentations of the survivors
over the dead.  The praises of each warrior are sung and a
messenger dispatched to acquaint Gorelind, Uta, and Brunhild
with the sad end of their kinsmen.  It closes with
Dietrich's departure from Etzel's court and his return home.
Although in one sense a continuation of our poem, the
"Klage" is an independent work of no great merit, being
excessively tedious with its constant repetitions.  A
reprint and a full account of it will be found in Piper's
edition of our poem, vol. I.
