"Pondering shadows, colors, clouds
Grass-buds, and caterpillar shrouds
Boughs on which the wild bees settle,
Tints that spot the violet's petal."
Eva's Visit to Fairy-Land
The Flower's Lesson
Little Annie's Dream: or, The Fairy Flower
night-wind; and the flowers stood gazing, in very wonder, at the
to the music of the hare-bells, who rung out their merriest peal
in honor of the night.
Under the shade of a wild rose sat the Queen and her little
Maids of Honor, beside the silvery mushroom where the feast
was spread.
With a gay smile, "Sunny Lock" began her story.
"As I was painting the bright petals of a blue bell, it told me
this tale."
THREE little Fairies sat in the fields eating their breakfast;
each among the leaves of her favorite flower, Daisy, Primrose,
and Violet, were happy as Elves need be.
The morning wind gently rocked them to and fro, and the sun
shone warmly down upon the dewy grass, where butterflies spread
their gay wings, and bees with their deep voices sung
among the flowers; while the little birds hopped merrily about
to peep at them.
On a silvery mushroom was spread the breakfast; little cakes
of flower-dust lay on a broad green leaf, beside a crimson
strawberry, which, with sugar from the violet, and cream
from the yellow milkweed, made a fairy meal, and their drink was
the dew from the flowers' bright leaves.
"Ah me," sighed Primrose, throwing herself languidly back,
"how warm the sun grows! give me another piece of strawberry,
and then I must hasten away to the shadow of the ferns.  But
while I eat, tell me, dear Violet, why are you all so sad?
I have scarce seen a happy face since my return from Rose Land;
dear friend, what means it?"
"I will tell you," replied little Violet, the tears gathering
in her soft eyes.  "Our good Queen is ever striving to keep
and we can do nothing to help or advise her now."
The ant and bee learned generosity, the butterfly and bird
contentment, the mole and worm confidence in the love of others;
many-colored flowers.
At length she rose, and amid the deep silence spoke thus:--
"Dear children, let us not tire of a good work, hard though it be
bloom in peace within their quiet homes?  We have tried to gain
sunlight and to joy.  How then may we keep our frail blossoms
from his cruel spirits?  Who will give us counsel?  Who will be
our messenger for the last time?  Speak, my subjects."
Long and eagerly they spoke, and their soft voices rose high.
Through the crowd there came a little form, a wreath of pure
white violets lay among the bright locks that fell so softly
round the gentle face, where a deep blush glowed, as, kneeling at
spoken fearlessly of his evil deeds?  Have we shed the soft light
"Our messengers have gone fearfully, and with cold looks and
courtly words offered him rich gifts, things he cared not for,
and with equal pride has he sent them back.
"Then let me, the weakest of your band, go to him, trusting
in the love I know lies hidden in the coldest heart.
"I will bear only a garland of our fairest flowers; these
will I wind about him, and their bright faces, looking lovingly
in his, will bring sweet thoughts to his dark mind, and their
soft breath steal in like gentle words.  Then, when he sees them
never leave his dreary home, till the sunlight falls on flowers
fair as those that bloom in our own dear land."
All who will aid our brave little messenger, lift your wands,
Every fairy wand glistened in the air, as with silvery voices
they cried, "Love and little Violet."
of the fairest flowers.  Tenderly they gathered them, with the
night-dew fresh upon their leaves, and as they wove chanted sweet
whom they sent forth to die in a dreary land, that their gentle
kindred might bloom unharmed.
At length it was done; and the fair flowers lay glowing
"We are sending you, dear flowers,
Forth alone to die,
Where your gentle sisters may not weep
O'er the cold graves where you lie;
But you go to bring them fadeless life
In the bright homes where they dwell,
And you softly smile that 't is so,
As we sadly sing farewell.
O plead with gentle words for us,
And whisper tenderly
Of generous love to that cold heart,
And it will answer ye;
And though you fade in a dreary home,
Yet loving hearts will tell
Of the joy and peace that you have given:
Flowers, dear flowers, farewell!"
The morning sun looked softly down upon the broad green earth,
Thus went Violet through the clear air, and the earth looked
smiling up to her, as, with the bright wreath folded in her
arms, she flew among the soft, white clouds.
On and on she went, over hill and valley, broad rivers and
rustling woods, till the warm sunlight passed away, the winds
grew cold, and the air thick with falling snow.  Then far below
murmured sadly through the wintry air.
With a beating heart Violet folded her fading wreath more closely
Gently she answered, telling them her errand, beseeching them
to let her pass ere the cold wind blighted her frail blossoms.
Then they flung wide the doors, and she passed in.
Walls of ice, carved with strange figures, were around her;
glittering icicles hung from the high roof, and soft, white snow
covered the hard floors.  On a throne hung with clouds sat
the Frost-King; a crown of crystals bound his white locks, and
a dark mantle wrought with delicate frost-work was folded over
his cold breast.
His stern face could not stay little Violet, and on through
the long hall she went, heedless of the snow that gathered on
her feet, and the bleak wind that blew around her; while the King
"O King of blight and sorrow, send me not away till I have
These fair flowers, with the prayers of all Fairy Land, I lay
before you; O send me not away till they are answered."
And with tears falling thick and fast upon their tender leaves,
"I cannot grant your prayer, little Fairy; it is my will
the flowers should die.  Go back to your Queen, and tell her
that I cannot yield my power to please these foolish flowers."
Then Violet hung the wreath above the throne, and with weary foot
Then came the Frost-Spirits, and beneath their cold wings the
flowers died, while the Spirits bore Violet to a low, dark cell,
in her ear, imploring her to save them.  Then she wept no longer,
Then she went to the ugly brown spiders, and in gentle words
better food than helpless insects.  You shall live in peace,
and spin your delicate threads into a mantle for the stern King;
And while she gayly sung, the little weavers spun their silken
When the Frost-Spirits told their King, he greatly wondered and
floated out into the cold air, where it hung like bright clouds
above the dreary gardens, whence all the Spirits' power could not
flowers bloomed; but the Spirits heaped snow upon them, and
they bowed their heads and died.
At length the mantle was finished, and amid the gray threads
shone golden ones, making it bright; and she sent it to the King,
to dwell within his breast.
But he scornfully threw it aside, and bade his Spirits take her
to a colder cell, deep in the earth; and there with harsh words
they left her.
velvet-coated moles, praying that they might listen to the sweet
music, and lie in the warm light.
"We lead," said they, "a dreary life in the cold earth; the
flower-roots are dead, and no soft dews descend for us to drink,
no little seed or leaf can we find.  Ah, good Fairy, let us be
And Violet said, Yes; so day after day they labored to make
From his dark castle the King looked out on the happy flowers,
who nodded gayly to him, and in sweet colors strove to tell him
of the good little Spirit, who toiled so faithfully below,
her dismal prison.
Soon they came hastening back, and prayed him to come and see
how lovely the dark cell had grown.  The rough floor was spread
with deep green moss, and over wall and roof grew flowery vines,
casting crumbs to the downy little moles who ran fearlessly about
With a sad farewell to her little friends she followed him, and
"Little Fairy, I offer you two things, and you may choose
"Ah!" answered Violet sadly, "do you not know that beneath
the flowers' bright leaves there beats a little heart that loves
and sorrows like our own?  And can I, heedless of their beauty,
warm, trusting hearts."
"Then listen," said the King, "to the task I give you.  You shall
that miracle I will grant your prayer or lose my kingly crown.
Then out into the gardens went Violet with a heavy heart; for
she had toiled so long, her strength was nearly gone.  But the
As time went by, the Frost-King feared the task had been
the flowers bowed their heads, and all was dark and cold as when
the gentle Fairy came.
And to the stern King his home seemed more desolate and sad; for
he missed the warm light, the happy flowers, and, more than all,
the gay voice and bright face of little Violet.  So he wandered
through his dreary palace, wondering how he had been content
to live before without sunlight and love.
and blossom which she had loved, and strove to be like her in
welcomed him, and brought fresh dew and rosy fruit to refresh the
her fadeless love had made the dark cell bright and beautiful.
the Elves upon the scene before them.
Flowering vines folded their soft leaves around the trees,
bearing two crowns, one of sparkling icicles, the other of pure
white lilies, and kneeling before him, said,--
"Send forth your Spirits to carry sorrow and desolation over
The old King looked at the little Fairy, and saw how lovingly
the bright shadows gathered round her, as if to shield her
from every harm; the timid birds nestled in her bosom, and the
Kind thought came thronging to his mind, and he turned to look at
Then, amid a burst of wild, sweet music, the Frost-King placed
The old King, surrounded by the happy Fairies, sat in Violet's
with the Elves, and waited on their King with loving eagerness.
Brighter grew the golden light, gayer sang the birds, and the
harmonious voices of grateful flowers, sounding over the earth,
carried new joy to all their gentle kindred.
Brighter shone the golden shadows;
On the cool wind softly came
The low, sweet tones of happy flowers,
Singing little Violet's name.
'Mong the green trees was it whispered,
And the bright waves bore it on
To the lonely forest flowers,
Where the glad news had not gone.
Thus the Frost-King lost his kingdom,
And his power to harm and blight.
Violet conquered, and his cold heart
Warmed with music, love, and light;
And his fair home, once so dreary,
Gay with lovely Elves and flowers,
Brought a joy that never faded
Through the long bright summer hours.
Thus, by Violet's magic power,
All dark shadows passed away,
And o'er the home of happy flowers
The golden light for ever lay.
Thus the Fairy mission ended,
And all Flower-Land was taught
The "Power of Love," by gentle deeds
That little Violet wrought.
DOWN among the grass and fragrant clover lay little Eva by the
It was a lily of the valley, whose tall stem formed the mast,
who danced to the music of the silver lily-bells above, that rang
and sang with the dancing waves.
They looked kindly on the child, and, after whispering long among
Eva looked into the brook, and saw a tiny child standing between
the Elves.  "Now I can go with you," said she, "but see, I can
"Now must we go home," said the Queen, "and you shall go with us,
the fragrant petals of a crimson rose.
"You can look at the bright colors till the light fades, and then
lovingly above her, and sang in the clear moonlight.
With the sun rose the Fairies, and, with Eva, hastened away to
Then they flew away to the gardens, and soon, high up among the
bright-winged birds came fearlessly among them, pecking the same
"Now, little Eva," said they, "you will see that Fairies are not
idle, wilful Spirits, as mortals believe.  Come, we will show you
They led her to a lovely room, through whose walls of deep green
leaves the light stole softly in.  Here lay many wounded insects,
Eva wondered, but silently followed her guide, little Rose-Leaf,
who with tender words passed among the delicate blossoms,
Then she went to the insects; first to a little fly who lay in a
flower-leaf cradle.
"Do you suffer much, dear Gauzy-Wing?" asked the Fairy.  "I will
Then said the Fairy, while she bathed the broken wing,--
"Love-Blossom, you should not murmur.  We may find happiness in
Then a faint voice whispered, "Little Rose-Leaf, come quickly, or
"Dear Fairy, the fairest flowers have cheered me with their sweet
Then the quivering wings were still, and the patient little dove
gentleness and love are prized far above gold or beauty, here in
to welcome her.
"Dear Queen," she sadly said, "I would gladly bring as pleasant
tidings as my sister, but, alas! my flowers are proud and wilful,
proudly closed their leaves and bid me go."
and when next you come, you will be laden with gifts from humble,
Then into a cheerful place they went, where were many groups of
flowers, among whose leaves sat the child Elves, and learned from
studied how to watch the tender buds, when to spread them to the
sunlight, and when to shelter them from rain; how to guard the
Eva nodded to the gay little ones, as they peeped from among the
among the petals of a flower that bent beside them, and asked
questions that none but Fairies would care to know.
"Rosebud, if a Cowslip opens three leaves in one day and four the
has bloomed?"
"Seven," sang the gay little Elf.
"Harebell, if a silkworm spin one yard of Fairy cloth in an hour,
"Twelve," said the Fairy child.
"Primrose, where lies Violet Island?"
"Lilla, you may bound Rose Land."
Then Eva saw how, on large, white leaves, the Fairies learned to
"You have stayed long enough," said the Elves at length, "we have
So Eva said farewell to the child Elves, and hastened with little
Then the child wondered no longer, but deeper grew her love
Long they stayed, and many a lesson little Eva learned:  but when
Then they went into a dark and lonely room, and here they found
"Ah," sighed the little one, "it was my only friend, and I
cherished it with all my lone heart's love; 't was all that made
my sad life happy; and it is gone."
Tenderly the child fastened the drooping stem, and placed it
where the one faint ray of sunlight stole into the dreary room.
"Do you see," said the Elves, "through this simple flower will we
And with busy love toiled the Elves amid the withered leaves,
lonely home; sweet, gentle thoughts filled her heart as she bent
to whisper gentle words, to cheer and comfort.
Thus their little hands led him back to peace and happiness,
waking in their bosoms all the holy feelings and sweet affections
Then through the summer sky, above the blossoming earth, they
Long they feasted, gayly they sang, and Eva, dancing merrily
among them, longed to be an Elf that she might dwell forever
in so fair a home.
"Dear child, tomorrow we must bear you home, for, much as we long
"Where have you brought me, and what mean these lovely sounds?"
asked Eva.
"Look here, and you shall see," said Rose-Leaf, as she bent aside
"Look again, and I will tell you," answered the Fairy.
Eva looked, and saw from every flower a tiny form come forth to
worthless thing if all be not fair and sweet within.  Do you see
yonder lovely spirit singing with my sister Moonlight?  a clover
"I will never break another flower," cried Eva; "but let me go
On a rosy morning cloud, surrounded by the loving Elves, went Eva
will make you happiest, and it shall be yours."
to make me happy, and taught me so many good and gentle lessons,
loving friends."
"Now, Star-Twinkle, what have you to teach?" asked the Queen.
THERE grew a fragrant rose-tree where the brook flows,
With two little tender buds, and one full rose;
When the sun went down to his bed in the west,
The little buds leaned on the rose-mother's breast,
While the bright eyed stars their long watch kept,
And the flowers of the valley in their green cradles slept;
Then silently in odors they communed with each other,
The two little buds on the bosom of their mother.
"O sister," said the little one, as she gazed at the sky,
"I wish that the Dew Elves, as they wander lightly by,
Would bring me a star; for they never grow dim,
And the Father does not need them to burn round him.
The shining drops of dew the Elves bring each day
And place in my bosom, so soon pass away;
But a star would glitter brightly through the long summer hours,
And I should be fairer than all my sister flowers.
That were better far than the dew-drops that fall
On the high and the low, and come alike to all.
I would be fair and stately, with a bright star to shine
And give a queenly air to this crimson robe of mine."
And proudly she cried, "These fire-flies shall be
Just then a tiny dew-drop that hung o'er the dell
On the breast of the bud like a soft star fell;
But impatiently she flung it away from her leaf,
And it fell on her mother like a tear of grief,
While she folded to her breast, with wilful pride,
A glittering fire-fly that hung by her side.
"Heed," said the mother rose, "daughter mine,
Why shouldst thou seek for beauty not thine?
The Father hath made thee what thou now art;
And what he most loveth is a sweet, pure heart.
Then why dost thou take with such discontent
The loving gift which he to thee hath sent?
For the cool fresh dew will render thee far
More lovely and sweet than the brightest star;
They were made for Heaven, and can never come to shine
Like the fire-fly thou hast in that foolish breast of thine.
O my foolish little bud, do listen to thy mother;
Care only for true beauty, and seek for no other.
There will be grief and trouble in that wilful little heart;
Unfold thy leaves, my daughter, and let the fly depart."
But the proud little bud would have her own will,
And folded the fire-fly more closely still;
Till the struggling insect tore open the vest
Of purple and green, that covered her breast.
When the sun came up, she saw with grief
The blooming of her sister bud leaf by leaf.
While she, once as fair and bright as the rest,
Hung her weary head down on her wounded breast.
Bright grew the sunshine, and the soft summer air
Was filled with the music of flowers singing there;
But faint grew the little bud with thirst and pain,
And longed for the cool dew; but now 't was in vain.
Then bitterly she wept for her folly and pride,
As drooping she stood by her fair sister's side.
Then the rose mother leaned the weary little head
On her bosom to rest, and tenderly she said:
"Thou hast learned, my little bud, that, whatever may betide,
Thou canst win thyself no joy by passion or by pride.
The loving Father sends the sunshine and the shower,
That thou mayst become a perfect little flower;--
The sweet dews to feed thee, the soft wind to cheer,
And the earth as a pleasant home, while thou art dwelling here.
Then shouldst thou not be grateful for all this kindly care,
And strive to keep thyself most innocent and fair?
Then seek, my little blossom, to win humility;
Be fair without, be pure within, and thou wilt happy be.
So when the quiet Autumn of thy fragrant life shall come,
Thou mayst pass away, to bloom in the Flower Spirits' home."
Then from the mother's breast, where it still lay hid,
Into the fading bud the dew-drop gently slid;
Stronger grew the little form, and happy tears fell,
As the dew did its silent work, and the bud grew well,
While the gentle rose leaned, with motherly pride,
O'er the fair little ones that bloomed at her side.
Night came again, and the fire-flies flew;
But the bud let them pass, and drank of the dew;
While the soft stars shone, from the still summer heaven,
On the happy little flower that had learned the lesson given.
"The little bud's lesson shall teach us how sad a thing is pride,
ONCE upon a time, two little Fairies went out into the world, to
came always from the wing of the gayest butterfly.
But he was not loved in Fairy-Land, for, like the flower whose
name and colors he wore, though fair to look upon, many were the
Such was Thistledown; but far different was his little friend,
On and on, over hill and valley, they went, chasing the gay
"Now, dear Thistle, do not harm these friendly blossoms," said
Lily-Bell; "see how kindly they spread their leaves, and offer us
leaves, lest he should harm them.
blooming flower and a tiny bud.
He would have stayed to harm them, but the rain fell fast, and he
we will do you harm."
this cold wind and rain."
"Others can forgive and love, beside Lily-Bell and Violet," said
Soon the sunlight came again, and with it Lily-Bell seeking for
Thistledown; but he was ashamed, and stole away.
strove to comfort those whom he had grieved; with gentle care she
So Thistle gladly went with him, and soon they came to a pleasant
"You cannot see our Queen to-night," said the little bee, "but
I will show you to a bed where you can rest."
And he led the tired Fairy to a little cell, where on a bed of
flower-leaves he folded his wings and fell asleep.
"Awake! awake! for the earliest gleam
Of golden sunlight shines
On the rippling waves, that brightly flow
Beneath the flowering vines.
Awake! awake! for the low, sweet chant
Of the wild-birds' morning hymn
Comes floating by on the fragrant air,
Through the forest cool and dim;
Then spread each wing,
And work, and sing,
Through the long, bright sunny hours;
O'er the pleasant earth
We journey forth,
For a day among the flowers.
"Awake! awake! for the summer wind
Hath bidden the blossoms unclose,
Hath opened the violet's soft blue eye,
And wakened the sleeping rose.
And lightly they wave on their slender stems
Fragrant, and fresh, and fair,
Waiting for us, as we singing come
To gather our honey-dew there.
Then spread each wing,
And work, and sing,
Through the long, bright sunny hours;
O'er the pleasant earth
We journey forth,
For a day among the flowers!"
shoulder, and his little cap held respectfully in his hand, he
followed Nimble-Wing to the great hall, where the Queen was being
things.  Order, patience, industry, who can teach so well as they
"Now come with us," they said.  So forth into the green fields
before he came to live with them, that many grew unhappy and
discontented, and they who had before wished no greater joy than
subjects, grief and care to me.  I cannot let my peaceful kingdom
worthy of it; so farewell."  And the doors of the once happy home
"Let us feast and make merry in the pleasant summer-time," said
So while the industrious bees were out among the flowers, he led
So here dwelt Thistle, and many kind friends gathered round him,
friends who had so kindly welcomed him looked upon him as an evil
So poor Thistle lay sorrowfully, wondering what would come of it,
"You have done many cruel things, and caused much sorrow to happy
solitude and darkness, till you have learned to find happiness in
Then the Brownies bore him to a high, dark rock, and, entering a
little door, led him to a small cell, dimly lighted by a crevice
through which came a single gleam of sunlight; and there, through
A little vine that grew outside his prison rock came creeping up,
with his small share of water, that the little vine might live,
even if it darkened more and more his dim cell.
The watchful Brownies saw this kind deed, and brought him fresh
Thus did poor Thistle strive to be more gentle and unselfish, and
She healed the drooping flowers, cheered the Queen Bee's grief,
Then Lily-Bell went seeking through the forest, listening for the
music, and soon a distant voice mournfully singing,--
"Bright shines the summer sun,
Soft is the summer air;
Gayly the wood-birds sing,
Flowers are blooming fair.
"But, deep in the dark, cold rock,
Sadly I dwell,
Longing for thee, dear friend,
"Thistle, dear Thistle, where are you?" joyfully cried Lily-Bell,
"Through sunlight and summer air
I have sought for thee long,
Guided by birds and flowers,
And now by thy song.
O'er hill and dell
Hither to comfort thee
At last he besought the silent Brownie earnestly to tell him
whither she had gone.
"Lily-Bell is safe," replied the Brownie; "come, you shall learn
the trial that awaits you."
The home of the Earth Spirits was the first to find, and no one
On he went, thinking of Lily-Bell, and for her sake bearing all;
But few believed him; for they remembered his false promises and
Long he wandered, and carefully he sought; but could not find the
Then he went among the flowers, but they closed their leaves, and
among the leaves as he passed.
This grieved poor Thistle, and he longed to tell them how changed
And when the flowers saw this, and found the once cruel Elf now
watering and tending little buds, feeding hungry insects, and
But no rude hand tore her little ones away, no unkind words were
kindness, and I would gladly repay all for the harm I have done;
but none will love and trust me now."
Then the little rose looked up, and while the dew-drops shone
like happy tears upon her leaves, she said,--
"I WILL love and trust you, Thistle, for you are indeed much
Then the little buds raised their rosy faces, danced again upon
trusted him when most forlorn and friendless.
moonlight, so bitterly, I longed to speak a kindly word to him.
Dear sisters, let us trust him."
So they called a little bright-eyed mole, and said, "Downy-Back,
we have given you a pleasant home among our roots, and you are
a grateful little friend; so will you guide dear Thistle to the
Earth Spirits' home?"
Downy-Back said, "Yes," and Thistle, thanking the kindly flowers,
Then they went quickly up the winding path, and Thistle, guided
by the sweet music, went on alone.
He soon reached a lovely spot, whose golden halls were bright
to the melody of soft, silvery bells.
Long Thistle stood watching the brilliant forms that flashed and
sparkled round him; but he missed the flowers and the sunlight,
and rejoiced that he was not an Earth Spirit.
And Thistle said, "No task will be too hard for me to do for dear
Then they led him to a strange, dark place, lit up with torches;
"I will tell," replied little Sparkle, "for I once worked here
myself.  Some of them watch above the flower-roots, and keep them
Then Thistle went among the Spirits, and joined in their tasks;
forest where Lily-Bell lay sleeping.
"You have done well," said he, "we hear good tidings of you from
bird and flower, and you are truly seeking to repair the evil
you have done.  Take now one look at your little friend, and then
Spirits; and if I deserve it, they will gladly aid me on my way."
So he flew down into the field below, and hastened busily from
flower to flower, till he had filled a tiny blue-bell with sweet,
So each day Thistle filled a flower-cup, and laid it at the door;
while all around the hive had grown fairer since the Fairy came.
At length, as he lay sleeping in a flower-bell, a little bee came
"What shall we do to you, naughty Elf?" said they.  "You are in
our power, and we will sting you if you are not still."
"Let us close the flower-leaves around him and leave him here
to starve," cried one, who had not yet forgotten all the sorrow
Thistle had caused them long ago.
"Can this be naughty Thistle?" said Nimble-Wing.
Little Hum joyfully obeyed; and Thistle followed him, as he flew
Long Thistle wondered at the beauty round him; and then he went
among the shining Spirits, told his tale, and asked a gift.
into darkened places, and soft winds to refresh and cheer.
"These are the things we do," said they, "and you must aid us
for a time."
And Thistle gladly went with the lovely Spirits; by day he joined
At length Star-Light bade him work no more, and gladly gave him
Then with a light heart Thistle journeyed away to the brooks and
rivers, seeking the Water Spirits.  But he looked in vain; till,
wandering through the forest where the Brownies took him captive,
repayed by pain and sorrow, and who now lay suffering and alone.
Thistle bent tenderly beside him, saying, "Dear Flutter, do not
Day by day did Thistle watch beside him, making little beds of
cool, fresh moss for him to rest upon, fanning him when he slept,
poor Flutter longed to be dancing once again over the blue waves,
farewell."
Thistle followed the little brook, as it flowed through field and
sorrow, and I will comfort you."
So, spreading his great wings, he flew away, and soon Thistle saw
Lofty arches of snow-white coral bent above him, and the walls
snow-white pearls like those they wore.  But Thistle had gained
With a patient hope that he might yet be worthy of Lily-Bell,
On through the fragrant air went Thistle, looking with glad face
singing by, beneath the arching ferns that bent above it; green
leaves rustled in the summer wind, and the air was full of music.
velvet moss that Fairy hands had spread.  The golden flower lay
Happy tears fell fast, as Thistle folded his arms around her,
"Bird, bee, and blossom have forgiven him, and none is more loved
And as the crown shone on the head that Lily-Bell bent down on
Thistle's breast, the forest seemed alive with little forms, who
"If I am Queen, then you are King, dear Thistle," said the Fairy.
As she ceased, down through the air came floating bands of lovely
"Have you a tale for us too, dear Violet-Eye?" said the Queen, as
flower-leaves where she sat, and with a smile replied, "As I was
weaving garlands in the field, I heard a primrose tell this tale
to her friend Golden-Rod."
IN a great forest, high up among the green boughs, lived Bird
and little worms.
The husband shook his head gravely, and said, "Be not alarmed, my
a little maiden lay singing within.  Then how amazed were they,
Great joy was in the forest, and proud were the parents of their
family, and still more of the little one who had come to them;
while all the neighbors flocked in, to see Dame Brown-Breast's
little child.  And the tiny maiden talked to them, and sang so
merrily, that they could have listened for ever.  Soon she was
the joy of the whole forest, dancing from tree to tree, making
every nest her home, and none were ever so welcome as little Bud;
The father now had much to do to supply his family with food, and
in the turf, were friends to the merry child.
And Bud said, "Yes," and they stayed; but her kind little heart
"Do not weep, and I will go to Queen Dew-Drop, and beseech her
to let you come back.  I will tell her that you are repentant,
far away, and she must journey long.
"Nay, you shall not go on your feet, my child," said Mother
Brown-Breast; "your friend Golden-Wing shall carry you.  Call him
my heart would break."
little Bud was going to Fairy-Land.
Then they all sang gayly together, till she passed out of sight
over the hills, and they saw her no more.
And now Bud left the old forest far behind her.  Golden-Wing
As Bud passed through the gates, she no longer wondered that the
though the blossoms nodded gayly on their stems to welcome her,
and the soft winds kissed her cheek, she would not stay, but on
to the Flower Palace she went, into a pleasant hall whose walls
were formed of crimson roses, amid whose leaves sat little Elves,
With tearful eyes, Queen Dew-Drop replied,--
Day after day toiled little Bud, cheering the Fairies, who,
angry and disappointed, would not listen to her gentle words,
Then they planted the lilies; but they soon drooped and died, and
blossoms, for she was striving to give happiness to others,
maiden, who has toiled while you have wept, you never would have
Time passed on, and the Fairies had done nothing to gain their
lovely home again.  They wept no longer, but watched little Bud,
they followed her, and like a band of guardian spirits they flew
far and wide, carrying with them joy and peace.
But most tenderly did they watch over the poor and sorrowing,
and many a poor mother blessed the unseen hands that laid food
before her hungry little ones, and folded warm garments round
their naked limbs.  Many a poor man wondered at the fair flowers
that sprang up in his little garden-plot, cheering him with their
One day came little Bud to them, saying,--
"Listen, dear friends.  I have a hard task to offer you.  It is a
gratitude will give you happy homes among their bright leaves.
Then deep in the earth the Fairies dwelt, and no frost or snow
could harm the blossoms they tended.  Every little seed was laid
tenderly performed.
Then came the merry birds, making the wood alive with their gay
voices, calling to one another, as they flew among the vines,
building their little homes.  Long waited the Elves, and at last
she came with Father Brown-Breast.  Happy days passed; and
Mounted on bright-winged butterflies, they flew over forest and
meadow, till with joyful eyes they saw the flower-crowned walls
Before the gates they stood, and soon troops of loving Elves
happiness to their fair kindred.
"Are they not worthy of your love, dear Queen? Have they not won
their lovely home? Say they are pardoned, and you have gained
As Bud ceased, she touched the wondering Fairies with her wand,
and the dark faded garments fell away; and beneath, the robes
of lily-leaves glittered pure and spotless in the sun-light.
the wands their own good deeds had rendered powerful.
They turned to thank little Bud for all her patient love,
but she was gone; and high above, in the clear air, they saw
the little form journeying back to the quiet forest.
She needed no reward but the joy she had given.  The Fairy hearts
"Now, little Sunbeam, what have you to tell us?" said the Queen,
"I too, like Star-Twinkle, have nothing but a song to offer,"
replied the Fairy; and then, while the nightingale's sweet voice
mingled with her own, she sang,--
IN a quiet, pleasant meadow,
Beneath a summer sky,
Where green old trees their branches waved,
And winds went singing by;
Where a little brook went rippling
So musically low,
And passing clouds cast shadows
On the waving grass below;
Where low, sweet notes of brooding birds
Stole out on the fragrant air,
And golden sunlight shone undimmed
On all most fresh and fair;--
There bloomed a lovely sisterhood
Of happy little flowers,
Together in this pleasant home,
Through quiet summer hours.
No rude hand came to gather them,
No chilling winds to blight;
Warm sunbeams smiled on them by day,
And soft dews fell at night.
So here, along the brook-side,
Beneath the green old trees,
The flowers dwelt among their friends,
The sunbeams and the breeze.
One morning, as the flowers awoke,
Fragrant, and fresh, and fair,
A little worm came creeping by,
And begged a shelter there.
"Ah! pity and love me," sighed the worm,
"I am lonely, poor, and weak;
A little spot for a resting-place,
Dear flowers, is all I seek.
I am not fair, and have dwelt unloved
By butterfly, bird, and bee.
They little knew that in this dark form
Lay the beauty they yet may see.
Then let me lie in the deep green moss,
And weave my little tomb,
And sleep my long, unbroken sleep
Till Spring's first flowers come.
Then will I come in a fairer dress,
And your gentle care repay
By the grateful love of the humble worm;
Kind flowers, O let me stay!"
But the wild rose showed her little thorns,
While her soft face glowed with pride;
The violet hid beneath the drooping ferns,
And the daisy turned aside.
Little Houstonia scornfully laughed,
As she danced on her slender stem;
While the cowslip bent to the rippling waves,
And whispered the tale to them.
A blue-eyed grass looked down on the worm,
As it silently turned away,
And cried, "Thou wilt harm our delicate leaves,
And therefore thou canst not stay."
Then a sweet, soft voice, called out from far,
"Come hither, poor worm, to me;
The sun lies warm in this quiet spot,
And I'll share my home with thee."
The wondering flowers looked up to see
Who had offered the worm a home:
'T was a clover-blossom, whose fluttering leaves
Seemed beckoning him to come;
It dwelt in a sunny little nook,
Where cool winds rustled by,
And murmuring bees and butterflies came,
On the flower's breast to lie.
Down through the leaves the sunlight stole,
And seemed to linger there,
As if it loved to brighten the home
Of one so sweet and fair.
Its rosy face smiled kindly down,
As the friendless worm drew near;
And its low voice, softly whispering, said
"Poor thing, thou art welcome here;
Close at my side, in the soft green moss,
Thou wilt find a quiet bed,
Where thou canst softly sleep till Spring,
With my leaves above thee spread.
I pity and love thee, friendless worm,
Though thou art not graceful or fair;
For many a dark, unlovely form,
Hath a kind heart dwelling there;
No more o'er the green and pleasant earth,
Lonely and poor, shalt thou roam,
For a loving friend hast thou found in me,
And rest in my little home."
Then, deep in its quiet mossy bed,
Sheltered from sun and shower,
The grateful worm spun its winter tomb,
In the shadow of the flower.
And Clover guarded well its rest,
Till Autumn's leaves were sere,
Till all her sister flowers were gone,
And her winter sleep drew near.
Then her withered leaves were softly spread
O'er the sleeping worm below,
Ere the faithful little flower lay
Beneath the winter snow.
Spring came again, and the flowers rose
From their quiet winter graves,
And gayly danced on their slender stems,
And sang with the rippling waves.
Softly the warm winds kissed their cheeks;
Brightly the sunbeams fell,
As, one by one, they came again
In their summer homes to dwell.
And little Clover bloomed once more,
Rosy, and sweet, and fair,
And patiently watched by the mossy bed,
For the worm still slumbered there.
Then her sister flowers scornfully cried,
As they waved in the summer air,
"The ugly worm was friendless and poor;
Little Clover, why shouldst thou care?
Then watch no more, nor dwell alone,
Away from thy sister flowers;
Come, dance and feast, and spend with us
These pleasant summer hours.
We pity thee, foolish little flower,
To trust what the false worm said;
He will not come in a fairer dress,
For he lies in the green moss dead."
But little Clover still watched on,
Alone in her sunny home;
She did not doubt the poor worm's truth,
And trusted he would come.
At last the small cell opened wide,
And a glittering butterfly,
From out the moss, on golden wings,
Soared up to the sunny sky.
Then the wondering flowers cried aloud,
"Clover, thy watch was vain;
He only sought a shelter here,
And never will come again."
And the unkind flowers danced for joy,
When they saw him thus depart;
For the love of a beautiful butterfly
Is dear to a flower's heart.
They feared he would stay in Clover's home,
And her tender care repay;
So they danced for joy, when at last he rose
And silently flew away.
Then little Clover bowed her head,
While her soft tears fell like dew;
For her gentle heart was grieved, to find
That her sisters' words were true,
And the insect she had watched so long
When helpless, poor, and lone,
Thankless for all her faithful care,
On his golden wings had flown.
But as she drooped, in silent grief,
She heard little Daisy cry,
"O sisters, look!  I see him now,
Afar in the sunny sky;
He is floating back from Cloud-Land now,
Borne by the fragrant air.
Spread wide your leaves, that he may choose
The flower he deems most fair."
Then the wild rose glowed with a deeper blush,
As she proudly waved on her stem;
The Cowslip bent to the clear blue waves,
And made her mirror of them.
Little Houstonia merrily danced,
And spread her white leaves wide;
While Daisy whispered her joy and hope,
As she stood by her gay friends' side.
Violet peeped from the tall green ferns,
And lifted her soft blue eye
To watch the glittering form, that shone
Afar in the summer sky.
They thought no more of the ugly worm,
Who once had wakened their scorn;
But looked and longed for the butterfly now,
As the soft wind bore him on.
Nearer and nearer the bright form came,
And fairer the blossoms grew;
Each welcomed him, in her sweetest tones;
Each offered her honey and dew.
But in vain did they beckon, and smile, and call,
And wider their leaves unclose;
The glittering form still floated on,
Lightly it flew to the pleasant home
Of the flower most truly fair,
On Clover's breast he softly lit,
And folded his bright wings there.
"Dear flower," the butterfly whispered low,
"Long hast thou waited for me;
Now I am come, and my grateful love
Shall brighten thy home for thee;
Thou hast loved and cared for me, when alone,
Hast watched o'er me long and well;
And now will I strive to show the thanks
The poor worm could not tell.
Sunbeam and breeze shall come to thee,
And the coolest dews that fall;
Whate'er a flower can wish is thine,
For thou art worthy all.
And the home thou shared with the friendless worm
The butterfly's home shall be;
And thou shalt find, dear, faithful flower,
A loving friend in me."
Then, through the long, bright summer hours
Through sunshine and through shower,
Together in their happy home
Dwelt butterfly and flower.
"Ah, that is very lovely," cried the Elves, gathering round
little Sunbeam as she ceased, to place a garland in her hair and
praise her song.
"Now," said the Queen, "call hither Moon-light and Summer-Wind,
for they have seen many pleasant things in their long wanderings,
"Most joyfully will we do our best, dear Queen," said the Elves,
as they folded their wings beside her.
IN a large and pleasant garden sat little Annie all alone, and
or wind, or flower; still the bright tears fell, and she forgot
all but her sorrow.
vine-leaf at her side; a lovely face smiled on her, from amid
"Who are you, lovely little thing?" cried Annie, smiling through
her tears.
"And are you really, then, a little Elf, such as I read of
"Yes, all these things I do, and many stranger still, that all
"Ah, you will not love me any more if I should tell you all,"
said Annie, while the tears began to fall again; "I am not happy,
"Gladly will I aid you, Annie, and if you truly wish to be
a happy child, you first must learn to conquer many passions that
holds it there."
As thus she spoke, the Elf took from her bosom a graceful flower,
a sweet reward."
"I cannot stay now, little Annie," said the Elf, "but when
be faithful to yourself, and the magic flower will never fade."
Then the gentle Fairy folded her little arms around Annie's neck,
The pleasant days of Spring and Summer passed away, and in
little Annie's garden Autumn flowers were blooming everywhere,
When first the Fairy placed it there, she had been pleased with
sadder peal.  Then she paid no heed to the silvery music sounding
One sunny morning, when the fresh, cool Winds were blowing,
Little Annie looked, searched, and asked them all if any one
could tell her of the Fairy whom she sought; but the birds looked
Then she went through broad fields of yellow grain, that waved
she longed to know.
"Now will I go among the hills," said Annie, "she may be there."
her long and useless search, she sat amid the ferns, and feasted
on the rosy strawberries that grew beside her, watching meanwhile
The night-wind rustled through the boughs, rocking the flowers
to sleep; the wild birds sang their evening hymns, and all within
And all night long beside her stood the Fairy she had sought, and
Little Annie dreamed she sat in her own garden, as she had often
becomes, unless you banish them for ever."
scornfully away from all the rest.  These and many others
strange power over her.  She could not drive them from her sight,
a faint, soft light, and on her breast she saw her fairy flower,
upon whose snow-white leaves her tears lay shining.
The light and perfume of the flower seemed to bring new strength
Then in her dream she felt how hard the spirits tried to tempt
and trouble her, and how, but for her flower, they would have led
she struggled, and tears often fell; but after each new trial,
till one by one the evil spirits fled away, and in their place
Then the low voice spoke again in Annie's sleeping ear, saying,
make your heart their home."
Meanwhile the forest was astir, birds sang their gay good-morrows
thought or feeling fled away, the smiling spirits of gentleness
and love nestled in her heart, and all was bright again.
So better and happier grew the child, fairer and sweeter grew the
At length, one day, as she sat singing in the sunny nook where
spread wide apart, and, rising slowly from the deep white cup,
appeared the smiling face of the lovely Elf whose coming she had
waited for so long.
"Dear Annie, look for me no longer; I am here on your own breast,
most faithfully and well," the Fairy said, as she looked into the
in her breast.
for the gentle, happy child, whose bosom flower will never fade.
And now, dear Annie, I must go; but every Springtime, with the
earliest flowers, will I come again to visit you, and bring
Then, with a kind farewell, the gentle Fairy floated upward
in the many-colored shells upon the shore, listening to the low,
murmuring music the waves had taught them long ago; and here
for hours the little Spirit lay watching the sea and sky, while
singing gayly to herself.
sparkled in the sand.
This was Ripple's only grief, and she often thought of those who
When Ripple saw the mother's grief, she longed to comfort her;
so, bending tenderly beside her, where she knelt upon the shore,
"Most gladly will I help you if I can, though I have little power
promise she had made.
"Good little Ripple," said the Queen, when she had told her all,
"your promise never can be kept; there is no power below the sea
tell me the path, and let me go."
"It is far, far away, high up above the sun, where no Spirit ever
But Ripple would not break the promise she had made, and besought
"I will search the broad earth till I find a path up to the sun,
Long she journeyed through the pathless ocean, with no friends
to cheer her, save the white sea-birds who went sweeping by, and
only stayed to dip their wide wings at her side, and then flew
silently away.  Sometimes great ships sailed by, and then with
floated on her way, and left them far behind.
nodded and smiled on the Spirit.
"I will ask Spring where the Fire-Spirits dwell; she travels over
"Dear Spring, will you listen, and help a poor little Spirit,
"The Fire-Spirits' home is far, far away, and I cannot guide you
calling me far and wide, and I cannot stay."
"Now I must seek for Summer," said Ripple, as she sailed slowly
through the sunny sky.
a warm, bright glow on all beneath.
Then Ripple told her tale, and asked where she should go; but
Summer answered,--
And Summer, giving her the sunbeam, passed away over the distant
hills, leaving all green and bright behind her.
So Ripple journeyed on again, till the earth below her shone
with yellow harvests waving in the sun, and the air was filled
with cheerful voices, as the reapers sang among the fields or in
the pleasant vineyards, where purple fruit hung gleaming through
the leaves; while the sky above was cloudless, and the changing
But when the wandering Spirit came to her, and asked for what she
"What do you seek with me, fair little Spirit, that you come
so bravely here amid my ice and snow?  Do not fear me; I am warm
But Ripple said, "I cannot turn back now, when I am nearly there.
"Adieu, little Ripple!  May good angels watch above you!  Journey
tossed, like great waves, to and fro.
Soon the cold vapors vanished from her path, and sunshine shone
upon her pleasantly; so she went gayly on, till she came up among
"The Fire-Spirits surely must be there, and I must stay no longer
Through the red mist that floated all around her, she could see
steady flame, that never wavered or went out.
As thus she stood, the Spirits gathered round her, and their
hot breath would have scorched her, but she drew the snow-cloak
closer round her, saying,--
So, through long halls of many-colored fire, they led her to
within her breast glowed bright and strong.
"This is our Queen," the Spirits said, bending low before her,
Then Ripple told how she had wandered round the world in search
of them, how the Seasons had most kindly helped her on, by giving
When she had told her tale, the spirits whispered earnestly
But Ripple asked no other boon, and, weeping sadly, begged them
"I have many fairer gems than these, in my home below the sea;
and I will bring all I can gather far and wide, if you will grant
the fiery Spirits, who were hovering fiercely round her.
fail not to return, or we shall seek you out."
forgot all else, and told the Spirits what they asked most surely
it shone and glittered like a star.
So, down along the shining path, through mist and cloud, she
Gladly she plunged into the clear, cool waves, and floated back
Then Ripple sang for joy, and, with her sister Spirits, robed the
So up they went, through foam and spray, till on the beach, where
"See, dear mother, I am come; and look what lovely things the
gentle Spirits gave, that I might seem more beautiful to you."
"O faithful little Spirit! I would gladly give some precious gift
And now another task was to be done; her promise to the
Fire-Spirits must be kept.  So far and wide she searched among
shining there; and then upon her faithful Breeze once more went
journeying through the sky.
The Spirits gladly welcomed her, and led her to the Queen,
before whom she poured out the sparkling gems she had gathered
with such toil and care; but when the Spirits tried to form them
Fire-Spirits looked upon her angrily, and when she begged them
to be merciful, and let her try once more, saying,--
"Do not keep me prisoner here.  I cannot breathe the flames that
for the child."
And Ripple, safe again beneath her snow flake, gladly gave
the chain to them; and told them how the pearls they now placed
proudly on their breasts were formed of tears, which but for them
like a wound to her.
"Then, if we may not tell our pleasure so, we will show it in a
a lovely rainbow arched its radiant colors in the sun.
"This is indeed a pleasant road," said Ripple.  "Thank you,
Then down along the shining pathway spread before her, the happy
little Spirit glided to the sea.
"Thanks, dear Summer-Wind," said the Queen; "we will remember the
The moonlight fades from flower and tree,
And the stars dim one by one;
The tale is told, the song is sung,
And the Fairy feast is done.
The night-wind rocks the sleeping flowers,
And sings to them, soft and low.
The early birds erelong will wake:
'T is time for the Elves to go.
O'er the sleeping earth we silently pass,
Unseen by mortal eye,
And send sweet dreams, as we lightly float
Through the quiet moonlit sky;--
For the stars' soft eyes alone may see,
And the flowers alone may know,
The feasts we hold, the tales we tell:
So 't is time for the Elves to go.
From bird, and blossom, and bee,
We learn the lessons they teach;
And seek, by kindly deeds, to win
A loving friend in each.
And though unseen on earth we dwell,
Sweet voices whisper low,
And gentle hearts most joyously greet
The Elves where'er they go.
When next we meet in the Fairy dell,
May the silver moon's soft light
Shine then on faces gay as now,
And Elfin hearts as light.
Now spread each wing, for the eastern sky
With sunlight soon will glow.
The morning star shall light us home:
Farewell! for the Elves must go.
As the music ceased, with a soft, rustling sound the Elves
