description."
Frequently my eyes would fill with tears when, having ascended a
At the barriers a new difficulty arose.  We delivered up our
But to proceed with my journey.
At eleven o'clock on the same night we reached
On Monday morning I once more hastened to the office in anxious
completed.
The first fourteen miles are very agreeable; gardens, fields, and
Among the public buildings, those which pleased me most were the
corroborate what I was so unwilling to believe!
The breadth of the Elbe at Blankenese exceeds two miles.
I noticed with pleasure that on this railway even the third-class
neighbourhood presents only widely-extended plains, turf-bogs and
The squares are all large and regularly built.  The finest is the
surrounded by several figures.
Smaller, but more beautiful in its perfect symmetry, is the
unfortunately yet unpacked.
Among the vessels lying at anchor in the harbour I saw but few
three-masters, and still fewer steamers.  The ships of the fleet
sea-sickness; so with all patience and resignation I received the
To be cheerful in the midst of all this requires a very quiet and
Before I land in Iceland, I must trouble the reader with a few
The first school was founded at Skalholt, about the middle of the
introduction of Christianity, all the Icelanders enjoyed an
unostentatious but undisturbed practice of their religion.
From these handsome houses I betook myself to the cottages of the
Fire-wood there is none throughout the whole island.  The rich
The neighbourhood of Havenfiord is formed by a most beautiful and
destruction.
willingness to oblige.  I can only say, may Heaven requite them a
With me this was not the case: I gave no parties--I brought no
refreshment, and to rejoice with his friends over the dangers and
residence.  Every Sunday he must do duty at one or other of these
Fishing and the chase are open to all, with the exception of the
At Reikjavik I had an opportunity of witnessing a great religious
On this occasion a considerable number of the country people were
Our road lay through fields of lava, swamps, and very poor grassy
throughout the whole kitchen, drying the fish which hung from the
The little island of Vidoe, four miles distant from Reikjavik, is
I was, however, assured that I should have no more such places to
Churches are in this country not only used for purposes of public
immediately began; they seemed particularly struck by my mode of
June 5th.
instances they formed long narrow chains.
On the following day (June 6th) I had a long ride to Reikjavik,
thirty-six good miles, mostly through fields of lava.
Tired and almost benumbed with cold, I arrived in the evening at
difficult.
Loading the pack-horses is a business of some difficulty, and is
It is impossible to remember how many times our baggage had to be
A sunset seen in the sublime wildness of Icelandic scenery has a
The best room, _i.e._ the store-room, was thrown open for my
accommodation, and a small wooden bedstead placed at my disposal.
On our way back we noticed, near a cottage, another remarkable
reservoir sinks several feet.
I should have felt tolerably comfortable in my present quarters,
Short summary of this journey:
First day, from Reikjavik to
Second day, from Thingvalla to
Third day, from Reikholt to the
different springs, and back again
Fourth day, from Reikholt to
Surthellir, and back to
Fifth day, from Kalmannstunga to
Sixth day, from Thingvalla to
Almanagiau, which we had passed on such a wretched road.
My unsteady guide pointed those out which we might unhesitatingly
When I had accustomed myself to these temporary effusions of my
It is singular how many people repeat every thing they hear from
Of the want of cleanliness of the Icelanders, no one who has not
distinguished for wealth, bravery, and civilisation.
The little town of Skalholt, my station this night, was once as
The smooth jet-black, bright, and dense lava is only found on the
July 1st.
I think, indeed, that the Icelanders are second to no nation in
The best soil in Iceland is on the Norderland.  There are a few
potato-grounds there, and some little trees, which, without any
The inhabitants of more southern regions have no idea of the
August 21st
Towards eleven o'clock in the forenoon we reached the port of
market-place, it is also very dirty.
I was fortunate enough to be in Christiania at the time when the
On the 25th August, at three o'clock in the afternoon, I left
A long, well-built wooden bridge, furnished with beautiful iron
The peasantry in this district have no peculiar costume; only the
Two remarkable sights claimed my attention at Kongsberg,--a rich
There are no proper hotels or posthouses on the little-frequented
The termination of the lake, which we soon reached, was already
wildly-romantic scenery in spite of the incessant rain and my wet
trembling of the rock beneath my feet.
about
From Kongsberg to the waterfall
From Tindosoe across the lake to
From Mael to the waterfall
We arrived at Gottenburg at nine instead of at six o'clock in the
September 4th.
insufficiently protected against rain.  The consequence of this
September 5th.
September 6th.
Further off rises the Kinne Kulle, {51} to which the traveller's
A large glass-factory is established at Bromoe, which fabricates
window-glass exclusively.  We stopped a short time, and took a
considerable cargo of the brittle material on board.
September 7th.
While the ship descended through the many locks, we visited the
September 8th.
September 9th.
On the summit of a steep precipice of the shore the hat of the
distance.
Two kings, John III. and Eric XIV., the latter with four of his
There is a large picture-gallery in this castle; but it contains
principally portraits of kings, not only of Sweden, but of other
September 12th.
First I visited the cathedral.  I entered, and stood still with
Several other monuments are erected in the side-chapels; those of
The monuments are in no way distinguished; only two are rather
characters.  The good people have united in this monument two
characteristics of the ancients of two entirely distinct empires.
brownish-red colour of the houses, which has a peculiarly sombre
appearance in the setting sun.
September 13th.
The little town of Danemora lies in the midst of a wood, and only
The stations are unequal,--sometimes long, sometimes short.  The
September 14th.
continent, till a nearer approach dispels the illusion.
September 19th.
September 20th.
September 21st.
In the afternoon we passed the Danish island Malmo.
abundance of green fields and fine meadows.
I arrived in Hamburgh about two o'clock in the afternoon; and my
September 27th.
engine-driver, the passengers having none.
I have never seen a town more beautifully or regularly built than
The splendid royal palace, the extensive buildings for the
The Gens-d'arme Square is distinguished by the French and German
nautilus-shells.
Before quitting Berlin, I must mention an arrangement which is
particularly convenient for strangers--namely, the fares for
October 1st.
comparison with the finest bathing-places of the world.
Office expenses
The deputy for the western
district
Office expenses
The deputy for the northern and
eastern districts
Office expenses
The bishop of Iceland, who draws
his salary from the
school-revenues, has paid him
from this treasury
The members of the Supreme Court:
One judge
First assessor
Second assessor
The land-bailiff of Iceland
Office expenses
The town-bailiff of Reikjavik
The first police-officer of
Reikjavik, who is at the same
_fl._ more than the second
officer
The second police-officer
The mayor of Reikjavik only draws
from this treasury his
house-rent, which is
The sysselman of the Westmanns
The other sysselmen, each
Medical department and midwifery:
The physician
House-rent
House-rent
The second apothecary at
Six surgeons in the country,
House-rent for some
For others
A medical practitioner on the
Reikjavik has two midwives,
each receives
The other midwives in Iceland,
amounting to thirty, each
receives
These midwives are instructed
and examined by the land
physician, who has the charge of
paying them annually.
From the school-revenues
The bishop receives
The teachers at the high
school:
The teacher of theology
The head assistant, besides
free lodging
The second assistant
House-rent
The third assistant
House-rent
The resident at the school
Otiorhynchus laevigatus, _Dhl_.  Otiorhynchus Pinastri, _Fabr_.
Otiorhynchus ovatus.  Staphylinus maxillosus.  Byrrhus pillula.
b.  _Neuroptera_.  Limnophilus lineola, _Schrank_.
_Felices_.  Cystopteris fragilis.
_Graminae_.  Festuca uniglumis.
_Cyperaceae_.  Carea filiformis.  Carea caespitosa.  Eriophorum
caespitosum.
_Juncaceae_.  Luzula spicata.  Luzula campestris.
_Salicineae_.  Salix polaris.
_Polygoneae_.  Remux arifolus.  Oxyria reniformes.
_Rubiaceae_.  Gallium pusillum.  Gallium verum.
_Labiatae_.  Thynus serpyllum.
_Asperifoliae_.  Myosotis alpestris.  Myosotis scorpioicles.
_Scrophularineae_.  Bartsia alpina (in the interior north-western
_Utricularieae_.  Pinguicula alpina.  Pinguicula vulgaris.
_Umbelliferae_.  Archangelica officinalis (Havenfiord).
_Cruciferae_.  Draba verna.  Cardamine pratensis.
_Violariceae_.  Viola hirta.
_Empetreae_.  Empetrum nigrum.
_Geraniaceae_.  Geranium sylvaticum (in pits near Thingvalla).
_Troseaceae_.  Parnassia palustris.
_Rosaceae_.  Rubus arcticus.  Potentilla anserina.  Potentilla
_Papilionaceae_.  Trifolium repens.
