I     'Imitation' the common principle of the Arts of Poetry.
VII   The Plot must be a Whole.
VIII  The Plot must be a Unity.
IX    (Plot continued.) Dramatic Unity.
X     (Plot continued.) Definitions of Simple and Complex Plots.
XII   The 'quantitative parts' of Tragedy defined.
XIII  (Plot continued.) What constitutes Tragic Action.
XV    The element of Character in Tragedy.
XVIII Further rules for the Tragic Poet.
XXIII Epic Poetry.
distinguished as writers of heroic or of lampooning verse.
Whether Tragedy has as yet perfected its proper types or not; and
Of the remaining elements Song holds the chief place among the
embellishments.
These principles being established, let us now discuss the proper
It is, moreover, evident from what has been said, that it is not
Two parts, then, of the Plot--Reversal of the Situation and
Recognition--turn upon surprises. A third part is the Scene of
First, the least artistic form, which, from poverty of wit, is
most commonly employed recognition by signs. Of these some are
But, of all recognitions, the best is that which arises from the
After this, the names being once given, it remains to fill in the
of Delivery and to the masters of that science. It includes, for
instance,--what is a command, a prayer, a statement, a threat, a
A Syllable is a non-significant sound, composed of a mute and a
non-significant sound, which out of several sounds, each of them
Words are of two kinds, simple and double. By simple I mean those
Every word is either current, or strange, or metaphorical, or
the day,' and old age, 'the evening of life,' or, in the phrase
of Empedocles, 'life's setting sun.' For some of the terms of the
{An ornamental word...}
An altered word is one in which part of the ordinary form is left
Of the various kinds of words, the compound are best adapted to
are,--the current or proper, the metaphorical, the ornamental.
Again, Epic poetry must have as many kinds as Tragedy: it must be
Epic poetry differs from Tragedy in the scale on which it is
Accordingly, the poet should prefer probable impossibilities to
improbable possibilities. The tragic plot must not be composed of
Other difficulties may be resolved by due regard to the usage of
Or again, the question may be solved by punctuation, as in
has been treated in this fashion. The critics imagine he was a
