with foreword by Charlotte M. Yonge
"My strength is as the strength of ten,
Because my heart is pure."
It is within the bounds of possibility that the similarities of
conqueror by his strong faith in the Bible. Sir Walter, between
was founded on the universal idea in folk-lore of the nixies or
water-spirits, one of whom, in Norwegian legend, was seen weeping
In stern compliance Biorn bowed his haughty head, and began the
"Most willingly," replied Rolf. "I have long desired to have an
"And let us add our devout supplications to the Lord," said the
The priest looked tenderly at him, and would have spoken his holy
"I live in death," replied that other one with a fearful grin.
"Whose are those bones on thy clothes?"
"They are relics, young sir."
"Art thou a pilgrim?"
"Restless, quietless, I wander up and down."
"Thou must not perish here in the snow before my eyes."
"That I will not."
"Thou must come up and sit on my horse."
"That I will." And all at once he started up out of the snow with
"Do not clasp me so tight with thy long arms, they are so cold."
"Do not breathe on me so with thy icy breath. All my strength is
departing."
"I do not know, father; he left me in the mountains."
"So'--Well, then, Rolf must remain here."
"That is just what I think, father."
"Were you riding quite alone?"
"The flow'ret was mine own, mine own,
But I have lost its fragrance rare,
And knightly name and freedom fair,
Through sin, through sin alone.
The flow'ret was thine own, thine own,
Why cast away what thou didst win?
Thou knight no more, but slave of sin,
Thou'rt fearfully alone!"
Sintram assented to all this, in deep and humble shame.
a peaceful man without provocation, and that, too, without giving
"Songs and flowers are returning,
And radiant skies of May,
Earth her choicest gifts is yielding,
But one is past away.
The spring that clothes with tend'rest green
Each grove and sunny plain,
Shines not for my forsaken heart,
Brings not my joys again.
Warble not so, thou nightingale,
Upon thy blooming spray,
Thy sweetness now will burst my heart,
I cannot bear thy lay.
For flowers and birds are come again,
And breezes mild of May,
But treasured hopes and golden hours
Are lost to me for aye!"
"Sir knight, sir knight, oh! whither away
With thy snow-white sail on the foaming spray?"
Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers!
"Too long have I trod upon ice and snow;
I seek the bowers where roses blow."
Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers!
He steer'd on his course by night and day
Till he cast his anchor in Naples Bay.
Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers!
There wander'd a lady upon the strand,
Her fair hair bound with a golden band.
Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers!
"Hail to thee! hail to thee! lady bright,
Mine own shalt thou be ere morning light."
Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers'
"Not so, sir knight," the lady replied,
"For you speak to the margrave's chosen bride."
Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers!
"Your lover may come with his shield and spear,
And the victor shall win thee, lady dear!"
Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers!
"Nay, seek for another bride, I pray;
Most fair are the maidens of Naples Bay."
Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers!
"No, lady; for thee my heart doth burn,
And the world cannot now my purpose turn."
Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers!
Then came the young margrave, bold and brave;
But low was he laid in a grassy grave.
Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers!
And then the fierce Northman joyously cried,
"Now shall I possess lands, castle, and bride!"
Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers!
Some weeks after this, in the twilight of evening, Sintram, very
"Afraid of you!" cried Sintram, with a wild laugh.
The little man, much pleased, nodded his head; and as they paced
together up and down a retired elm-walk, he began discoursing as
"Tell me at once what happened next," stammered Sintram.
"And he accepted those terms, or he was a fool!" cried the youth.
"My Lord and God, I pray,
Turn from his heart away
This world's turmoil;
And call him to Thy light,
Be it through sorrow's night,
Through pain or toil."
"And of all the German trading-towns," continued Montfaucon, "the
unfruitful; but, compared with the wise Gotthard Lenz and his
Gabrielle hesitated an instant; and Sintram, who had resumed his
"A man of honour," said Biorn confidently.
of Hogni, the last of his race, had there ended darkly a sad and
As the seventh night, the last before the day of combat, was just
"Warriors bold of Eric's band,
Gird your glittering armour on,
Stand beneath to-morrow's sun,
In your might.
Fairest dame that ever gladden'd
Our wild shores with beauty's vision,
May thy bright eyes o'er our combat,
Judge the right!
Tidings of yon noble stranger
Long ago have reach'd our ears,
Wafted upon southern breezes,
O'er the wave.
Now midst yonder hostile ranks,
In his warlike pride he meets us,
Folko comes! Fight, men of Eric,
True and brave!"
These wondrous tones floated over the plain, and reached the tent
Now the night had passed away, and the east was glowing; and on
In sight of both armies, with glowing cheeks and looks of modest
trumpets of the assembled troops greeted the youth with stunning
"The strife at length hath found its end,
Rich blessings now shall heaven send!
The evil foe is slain!"
Meanwhile Sintram was speaking earnestly to his good Rolf; and at
Rolf bowed readily, and went.
"Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers,"
On a sudden old Rolf appeared, returning home from a visit to the
"Methinks that I have heard thee before."
"And didst thou break there thy neck?"
"I live,--and shall live longer than thou."
"Give me hold of thy hand, and let me help thee to get up."
His guests stared at him doubtingly; and with a strange air of
Sintram had not returned home, when those of the castle betook
At the close of one of these martial exercises, old Rolf advanced
At length the icy reign of winter began in all its glory. On this
Joyful at a combat so long untried as almost to be new, Folko of
Sintram shuddered. Then his hateful companion began to praise
Sintram planted his staff firmly in the ground, and stopped. How
The Norwegians burst forth with shouts of joyful surprise at the
That was a mournful journey on which the youth and his aged
"But, Rolf, look there! look again carefully! Now they move, they
"Beware of disappointing me again!" said the little Master to the
Then the first rays fell on the snow, and the little Master ran,
"For Heaven's sake," whispered the good Rolf to his knight--"for
Sintram bowed himself towards the chaplain with his arms crossed
over his breast, and said, with a gentle smile, "Much have I been
reconciliation is now arrived."
"When death is coming near,
When thy heart shrinks in fear
And thy limbs fail,
Then raise thy hands and pray
To Him who smooths thy way
Through the dark vale.
Seest thou the eastern dawn,
Hearst thou in the red morn
The angel's song?
Oh, lift thy drooping head,
Thou who in gloom and dread
Hast lain so long.
Death comes to set thee free;
Oh, meet him cheerily
As thy true friend,
And all thy fears shall cease,
And in eternal peace
Thy penance end."
"Not killed?" asked the pilgrim in a scarce audible voice.
"I feel, too, as though a spring were gushing up in the barren
"But it will be granted!" said the chaplain, joyfully. "'He that
humbleth himself shall be exalted;' and I fear not to take one
"Sleep peacefully, dear boy;
Thy mother sends the song
That whispers round thy couch,
To lull thee all night long.
In silence and afar
For thee she ever prays,
And longs once more in fondness
Upon thy face to gaze.
And when thy waking cometh,
Then in thy every deed,
In all that may betide thee,
Unto her words give heed.
Oh, listen for her voice,
If it be yea or nay;
And though temptation meet thee,
Thou shalt not miss the way.
If thou canst listen rightly,
And nobly onward go,
Then pure and gentle breezes
Around thy cheek shall blow.
Then on thy peaceful journey
Her blessing thou shalt feel,
And though from thee divided,
Her presence o'er thee steal.
O safest, sweetest comfort!
O blest and living light!
That, strong in Heaven's power,
All terrors put to flight!
Rest quietly, sweet child,
And may the gentle numbers
Thy mother sends to thee
Waft peace unto thy slumbers."
The dawn had almost appeared, when Rolf, who had been asleep, was
Accordingly towards mid-day the chaplain returned alone. He could
"And in eternal peace our penance end!"
"What means this?" asked Folko very gravely.
At a sign from Folko, a battle-axe was brought him by one of his
The hard spirit of the fierce lord of the castle was now quite
"Wilt thou come with me?" whispered the strange being; "it is the
brightest hour!"
At this moment the good Rolf appeared above on the rampart; a
Sintram climbed up the wall of the moat, and made a sign to his
Sintram was seated near the drawbridge, touching the strings of
the lute, and shedding some tears on the golden chords, almost as
"The good God knows," answered Sintram; "I know them not."
"Whom worldlings scorn,
Who lives forlorn,
On God's own word doth rest;
With heavenly light
His path is bright,
His lot among the blest."
After thus fearfully erring, Sintram could find no comfort but in
But all remained as it was, and Sintram's fearful dreams at
He took his horse from the stable and rode forth in the gathering
their ears. Sintram gave his horse hastily to some retainers in
"Yes, do so, Sir Sintram," said the little Master, with a laugh.
At length the dawn of morning appeared through the windows of the
Before entering the rocky pass, the knight, with a prayer and
"You have cowardly beasts with you," said the latter, in a low,
smothered voice.
Sintram was unable, in the ever-increasing darkness, rightly to
"Good, sir knight; then ride with me through the valley."
"I am going through the valley, but I want no companions."
"He will return no more," said Death, in a kindly tone.
"And now I am become wholly thine, my stern companion?"
"Oh! I can truly appear very gentle."
"The world and Satan are o'ercome,
Before thee gleams eternal light,
Warrior, who hast won the strife:
Save from darkest shades of night
Him before whose aged eyes
All my terrors soon shall rise."
"But why didst thou that?"
They heard the sound of Sintram's spurs on the stone steps, and
As the day wore on, the stillness in the hall increased. The last
"In whose sweet presence sorrow dares not lower
Nor expectation rise
Too high for earth."--Christian Year
"God's will be done!" said the knight, and he rose up full of
self-devotion and firmness.
